<figure>
<img src="../abbey-walls.jpg" alt="A view of the remaining walls of a large ancient ruined structure. The viewpoint is from the top of one wall, and we look down and across the rest of the structure. Tall arches are on the walls. On the left a large chunk of wall is missing, and a little further away on this same side a short tower rises from the wall. A similar tower is in the far right corner of the structure. There is no roof, other than atop these two small towers. The tops of the walls have plant life growing on them. The structure is surrounded by well-kept grass with straight paths. There are a few trees. Further away is a town.">
<figcaption>

Grasses and flowers sprouting atop the ancient walls is a technique
called “soft capping” to protect them. <span class="ednote">[Photo from the Abbey website;
it was not in the printed newsletter.]</span>

</figcaption>
</figure>

The trustees of Glastonbury Abbey took delivery of a Conservation Plan
for the site earlier this year — the abbey ruins, the grounds, the
Gatehouse, Abbey House — and for the collection of excavated artefacts
in their care. The plan is the product of two and a half years of hard
graft by a team of researchers led by Dr **Jo Cox**, of the Exeter firm
Keystone.

The term ”conservation plan” is perhaps misleading. It conjures up
specifications for mortar mixes and schedules of repair and
stabilisation work. A conservation plan is in fact a series of policies,
which will guide an organisation in the management of the historic
monument in its care and ensure its significance is retained and even
enhanced. These policies are arrived at through a staged process,
starting with a largely chronological account of the monument’s history,
followed by an analysis of why the building is important. The third
stage is the identification of factors that put it at risk.

The Glastonbury plan is supported by a gazetteer of the archaeology and
upstanding buildings, by an analysis of the landscape and a report on
the ecology of the site.

Launched with an all-day symposium
----------------------------------

To launch the plan the Abbey trustees held a symposium on October 8 to
secure support and establish a common will to tackle the priorities
identified in the document. An audience of invited guests, representing
local and national bodies, local government, the Church, academic and
charitable institutions was regaled by a series of thought-provoking and
entertaining talks.

The day was chaired by Dr **Robert Dunning**, chairman of the
Glastonbury Abbey Trust and recently retired editor of the Victoria
County History for Somerset. Dr Jo Cox opened the proceedings with a
paper on how the massive task of researching and putting together the
conservation plan was carried out.

**Rosemary Cramp**, a leading expert on Anglo-Saxon archaeology and
immediate past president of the Society of Antiquaries of London, then
described Glastonbury Abbey’s importance to the history and archaeology
of monasticism. Its record of monastic life and teaching, unbroken from
the earliest days of Christianity in Britain to the Dissolution in 1539,
is unique. It is one of the few great monastic sites to have been
subjected to extensive excavation. Its record could answer many
questions about the cultural and economic history of religious
establishments if only it was made available through research and
publication.

She endorsed the trustees’ aim of trying to bring together and assess
all the extant information. The result would make fascinating displays,
which would bring the fragmentary material alive. She also stressed the
importance in this modern age of storing excavated material in
environmentally controlled and accessible conditions.

**Alan Thomas**, the abbey’s consultant architect, rounded off the
morning session with an account of the conservation work that has been
carried out on the abbey church over the past two years.

Current work: new modern viewing bridge, scaffolding on the nave
----------------------------------------------------------------

A new viewing bridge has been installed in the Lady Chapel give level
access to the church and to help protect the medieval stonework from
wear. The structure is a striking modern design of glass and steel,
which appears to float over the void of St Joseph’s crypt. If you
haven’t seen it yet, it is well worth inspection.

Extensive work has been carried out on the south wall of the nave, the
crossing piers and the north transept. It was the first time for many
decades that these areas had been scaffolded. As it turned out, this was
none too soon: a stone from high up on one of the piers came away in the
hand of a conservator as he started work!

Alan described the challenges of looking after a building like the
abbey: should one repair or conserve, stabilize or allow weathering? He
also told us of the opportunities the scaffolding presented for close
study of the construction methods and phases of the medieval masons.

You may be surprised when you visit the abbey now to see that the tops
of the newly conserved walls are already sprouting grasses and flowers.
Don’t worry; this is called “soft capping”, a technique that actually
protects the top and face of the walls.

The Abbey’s place in church history
-----------------------------------

Dom **Aidan Bellenger**, claustral prior at Downside Abbey, began the
afternoon session with a presentation entitled “Glastonbury Abbey in the
history of the church: spirituality of place”. It was a
thought-provoking analysis of the place of Glastonbury Abbey within the
spirituality of the nation. He identified seven key features:

1. The *genius loci* — The visual and topographical impact of Glastonbury.

2. The antiquity of Glastonbury — Continuity and tradition are important in
   relation to Glastonbury.

3. Monasticism — Dunstan symbolizes the beauty of holiness, of prayer and
   liturgy in a monastery.

4. Holy men and women of Glastonbury — The inspiring lives of these individuals
   give a human dimension, substance, life and fun to the place.

5. Relics of saints — The relics at Glastonbury were prodigious in quality and
   quantity.

6. Pilgrimage — This was undertaken by rich and poor.

7. Renewal — Glastonbury has risen again like a phoenix in the 20th century.

He then looked at what might be important to the spiritual dimension of
Glastonbury in the future and came up with five strands:

1. The continuity, change and development of ideas and spirituality

2. The biography of the site, which provides models for understanding the past.

3. The cultural enhancement of spirituality through liturgy, music and the
   visual arts.

4. Spirituality — silence, prayer and community.

5. The historians and storytellers of Glastonbury — Archaeologists can endorse
   the history, which is as exciting as the myth.

Glastonbury Abbey is the expression, in its architecture and community,
of the monastic vision of the monastery as a paradigm of the New
Jerusalem.

English Heritage practicalities
-------------------------------

**Edward Impey**, head of research and standards at English Heritage,
then brought us back to practicalities with a presentation on
Glastonbury Abbey as a visited monument. He acknowledged that the range
of issues covered in the Conservation Plan is daunting, but that it has
laid firm foundations for the work. He emphasizsed that understanding is
the basis of conservation; you cannot look after your asset physically
if you do not understand it. It is essential to grasp the significance
of a site if you are going to bring it to life for others.

The presentation of a monument to the public should be fun, accessible
and understandable. He asked the audience: “What do you tell people?
Where do you pitch it?” In answer to his own question, he made the
refreshing comment that audience research should not dictate your
approach. He claimed there is much that people do not even know they
want and advised us not go for the lowest common denominator;
dumbing-down should not be tolerated.

The day was rounded off in typically stirring style by a discussion led
by Professor **Mick Aston**, president of the Somerset Archaeological
and Natural History Society, but possibly better know as the resident
archaeologist on Channel 4’s *Time Team*.

A look at the Conservation Plan
-------------------------------

Delegates from the floor endorsed key policies in the Conservation Plan:

- The need for a major project to research, interpret and make available
  the unpublished archaeological archive of Glastonbury Abbey.

- The importance of commissioning a topographical survey of the site, a
  photographic record of the upstanding buildings and even a geophysical
  survey.

- The need for better storage of the collections belonging to the abbey.

- The importance of developing high-quality visitor facilities and
  services (café, shop, toilets, entrance, exhibitions, education) to the
  continued success of Glastonbury Abbey.

The day ended having achieved its aims of securing support and creating
a common will to tackle the priorities identified in the conservation
plan. Connections were made and doors opened. The trustees and staff of
Glastonbury Abbey left determined to capitalize on the momentum and
goodwill generated by the day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<footer class="ednote">

Vicky Dawson is consultant curator to the trustees of Glastonbury Abbey.

</footer>
