<figure>
<img src="../GeoffBrunt.jpg" alt="Two men stand wearing coats in front of a vehicle. They are on a gravel road running between many trees and bushes. The man on the left has dark receding hair and a beard, and he wears a suit and tie beneath his coat. He is smiling and handing a framed certificate to the man on the right, who has short grey hair and wears glasses.">
<figcaption>

David Heath, MP for Somerton and Frome, presents the English Nature SSSI
Award for 1999–2000 to Geoff Brunt (right) at the Polden Hills
grasslands.

</figcaption>
</figure>

<aside class="ednote">

Reprinted from Somerset Nature

</aside>

Unassuming Geoff Brunt might be a thwarted biologist, but to
conservation, he is definitely someone rather special. “My first love
was biology, but I couldn’t get to grips with the Latin, so I became a
physicist instead,” laughs Geoff, who received an English Nature SSSI
Award of Excellence.

Although he will be the last to admit it, Geoff has been the guiding
light in the restoration of the calcareous grasslands in the Polden
Hills SSSI (site of special scientific interest).

A retired physics teacher from Millfield School, he combined his passion
for nature conservation with his unerring charm to persuade his old
school to purchase a nearby nature reserve to improve it for wildlife.

For nearly 10 years, between 200 and 250 pupils a year have been
actively involved in strimming, coppicing and other hands-on activities,
helping to regenerate the reserve.

“The pupils have been mainly first-years and most are extremely
enthusiastic too. Of course, it depends on their tutor to whip up the
initial enthusiasm, but many of those 13-year-olds will be our
conservationists of the future,” Geoff says.

And while delighted to have been nominated for the award, Geoff, a
former area chairman for Glastonbury and Street branch of Somerset
Wildlife Trust, would rather talk about his many friends and colleagues
who have helped him with his pet project. “I am very grateful to all the
people who have given their time to the project — people like David
Lester, the voluntary warden from Somerset Wildlife Trust’s Reserve at
Great Breach Wood. He’s given hours of practical assistance, together
with some very illuminating slide shows for Millfield,” he enthuses.
“Since I first got involved with the Trust 16 years ago David has taught
me all I know,” he adds.

He is equally quick to recognise organisations such as the Clarks Trust
and English Nature, who each contributed £6,000 for sheep management by
installing fencing at Hatch Hill, where Geoff also manages land on
behalf of the Clarks Trust. This immediately leads into praise for John
Poingdestre’s fencing — “exceptionally good quality“.

English Nature’s conservation officer, Mike Edgington, flies the flag
for Geoff: “He has organised the entire project and both sites involved
have now achieved SSSI status. On one site, the chalk hill blue
butterfly’s population has risen from a count of two to over 50 in just
over six years,” he points out. Other thriving species include autumn
lady tresses, bee orchid and early gentian.

Not content with his achievements to date, Geoff aims to link a further
great swath of land from Walton Hill to the Millfield reserve. Only one
small piece of land remains in private ownership and he is determined to
trace the owner!

Last, but not least, Geoff mentions someone else to be acknowledged.
“It’s Marjorie, my wife. She’s been so tolerant.”
