Susannah van Rose’s explanation of the geological context of Glastonbury
Tor provided a fascinating excursion into periods far more remote than
usually covered in the lecture programme. This meeting was organized by
the Antiquarian Society in the new library on November 17.

It is important to relate the Tor to the nearby formations of Brent
Knoll and Pennard Hill, she said. Both share its geological makeup and
are part of a formation including the adjoining lowlands and an area
extending beneath the Bristol Channel into South Wales.

In 1929 it was recognized that the Bristol Channel comprises two
distinct parts: an east-west section and the upper part aligned
southwest-northeast. 30,000 years ago the Mendips crossed the Bristol
Channel into South Wales, but during the Ice Age the Severn, which had
previously flowed north towards Cheshire, was blocked by advancing
glaciers to form a massive lake, which eventually spilled south via
Ironbridge Gorge and eroded a channel through the Mendip range, thus
dividing and obscuring the visible geology of this area.

The rocks of the area southwest of the Mendips were formed in the
Jurassic epoch, 200 million years ago, when tectonic movements split
apart the huge supercontinent of Pangaea, separating North and South
America from Eurasia and Africa. Volcanic activity formed and expanded
the Atlantic ocean floor, resulting in rising sea-levels flooding the
central Somerset area and the formation of sedimentary deposits with
their characteristic fossils such as ammonites. Areas of hot rock
intruding beneath the crust caused uplift of these deposits, exposing
them to erosion. Glastonbury Tor, Brent Knoll and Pennard Hill were in
situations where a downfold occurred, resulting in the compression and
preservation of the rocks above.

Subsequent subsidence of the region during the last Ice Age and
inundation by the sea resulted in the deposits of marine clay across the
central Somerset area. Peat formed in the shallower water; the Tor and
its relatives remained as islands.

Susannah concluded by noting that the region is still sinking. In 1607
floods came up as far as St Benedict’s church, and will surely do so
again!

Questions from the audience resulted in a lively debate and much
interest in the nature of the springs emanating from the Tor.

(Susannah van Rose, *née* Jones, grew up at the Copper Beech in
Magdalene Street.)
