As I write, the question of **pedestrian priority** in the High Street
remains undecided, but less likely due to lack of support. Our society
remains supportive, and it is interesting that Street town traders are
showing interest in a scheme of their own. Glastonbury is notorious for
resisting change, but then again it has had a lot of change foisted on
it over the years and managed to survive.

**The kissing gate** at the top of Dod Lane into Bushy Coombe is now in
place. Paul Bannell did the wrought-iron, George Steer the on-site
construction and Richard Bowditch made the plaque. Our society has
funded this as a millennium project, and it should be enjoyed by many en
route to the Tor.

We have supported a planning application for a **Arthurian visitor
interpretation centre** at the top of the High Street, in the former
Co-op supermarket building. Provided this is well done, it could
revitalize the top end of the High Street with a better spread of
visitors.

Concerns over **blocked footpaths** off Sedgemoor Way are being
addressed to the rights-of-way officers. Once the developments are
completed, the paths will reopen. Please get out and clear your section
of country footpaths. A footpath maintenance coordinator is needed —
volunteer, please?

<figure>
<img src="../leperhospital.png" alt="An intricate black-and-white rendering of an old stone building surrounded by bushes and other plants.">
<figcaption>
St Margaret’s Leper Hospital in Taunton, engraved by Utting from a
drawing by A.A. Clarke for the Revd Thomas Hugo’s 1874 “History of
S. Margaret’s Hospital”.
</figcaption>
</figure>

The **Somerset Buildings Preservation Trust** has a new project:
restoring the old St Margaret’s Leper Hospital at Taunton. This later
rebuild of the mediaeval building was extensively damaged by fire after
its thatched roof caught light. Note Abbot Bere’s rebus reinstated on
the front. The principal funders are English Heritage and Wyvern Trust;
Somerset County Council, Taunton Deane and other trusts will be
approached. Public open days are in April and during the course of the
works. West Somerset Rural Housing Association is to fund the conversion
to residential use.
