Nearly a thousand feet up above Wells, on the Bristol Road by
Cleopatra’s needle or the Pen Hill TV mast, live a charming retired
couple under the shade of some magnificent beech trees. Pat and Tommy
Todd of Beechbarrow have kindly allowed the Glastonbury Conservation
Society to collect saplings from under their trees.

Ian Rands had arranged for us to collect about 70 small trees to
transplant to our hedgerow in East Pennard. We were the last of the
lucky ones, as more than a thousand trees have been replanted from
Beechbarrow to places around Mendip.

Tommy, who was once a Grenadier Guardsman, and his wife Pat used to live
in Whitstable, near Ramsgate in Kent, where Tommy’s dad was known as
Cockle Todd, having sold cockles from his barrow there. Tommy had
hundreds of relatives living in the area. About sixteen years ago to be
closer to their son, his wife and five grandchildren, they moved to
Beechbarrow.

Beechbarrow has a fascinating history. Around 1942, Italian prisoners of
war came up from their camp near Wookey Hole (the present EMI site) to
repair the stone wall alongside the road. Even after their release many
prisoners decided to stay and work in the area. One such Italian loved
the beautiful scenery around Beechbarrow because it reminded him of the
seven hilltops around Rome. If one takes time to look one can count
seven hills from there.

The Italian asked if he could make a statue with the leftover muck
(cement) from the day’s work — he had been a stonemason in Rome, and
wanted to mark the spot with a statue dedicated to Romulus and Remus,
the twin brothers who were the legendary builders of Rome. The story
goes that they were brought up by a wolf, and this wolf is what he
sculpted there, which still stands by the road, on a tall Roman-style
pillar.

So now when we plant our beech grove at Sunnyside, East Pennard, there
will be a story to tell; maybe one day someone might tell the tale under
the shade of a beautiful glorious beech tree. All thanks to the Todds:
what goes round comes around.

As the plantations grow here, there and everywhere, tomorrow will show
that people really do care and will share when there is plenty. With
thanks to all who have helped us put our orchard back together, and
especially to the indispensable Major Ian Rands.
