<figure>
<img src="../dunning.png" alt="A middle-aged, clean-shaven white man with grey hair combed to the side looks at the camera. He wears a white shirt, a colourful tie, and a dark jacket.">
</figure>

<aside class="boxout ednote">

Dr Robert Dunning, the Somerset county historian and present chairman of
the Abbey trustees, spoke at the Town Hall on March 30 in 2005 at an
event hosted by the Conservation Society to mark the tercentenary of
Queen Anne granting Glastonbury its town charter. It was meant to be
both illuminating and light-hearted. The audience of about 150 included
VIPs such as the Lord Lieutenant and High Sheriff of Somerset and mayors
and chairmen of surrounding councils — and Queen Anne made a rare
appearance.

The newsletter did not publish this full text; it gave a link to it on
this website. \[Crossheads and several paragraph breaks are editorial.\]

</aside>

<figure>
<img src="../QueenAnne13-.jpg" alt="A woman in red and white upper-class early-modern-period dress sits on an opulent throne. Two men stand beside her in navy and gold robes, holding staffs.">
<figcaption>

Queen Anne on the Town Hall stage was played by Muriel Mudie. Flanking
her are the town’s macebearers, Michael King and Victor Jones.

</figcaption>
</figure>

It is a great honour, if only a fleeting one, to have shared this stage
with the monarch in whose name Glastonbury came to be a corporate town.
She has, I fear, yet another attack of gout coming on, a malady which
never improved her temper.

The royal cipher AR, Anna Regina, Anne the Queen, the royal arms of
Stuart, and the date 1705 all on the town’s precious silver-gilt maces
are reminders that by the charter granted in her name in that year a
group of worthy townsmen were empowered to govern their community. The
maces are symbols of authority, and were brought to all meetings of the
corporation as well as to court sessions; and of course to State
occasions when the constables appeared resplendent in expensive caped
coats and cocked hats. They have been silent witnesses to unholy rows
and political bargaining, you may be sure; what a pity it is we cannot
be certain who made them: the names of Nathaniel Lock and Seth Lofthouse
have both been quoted with equal authority.

Now I am sure, in this significant Glastonbury anniversary year, that no
one here suspects that any future local government reorganization scheme
(and there will be one, you can be sure) will deprive this and other
towns of any further significant evidences of their heritage, but how
without such a provocative title as I have chosen would you have been
induced to attend a stuffy lecture on the history of the corporation?

Why was Glastonbury so late?
----------------------------

But my question really is: Why in the year of grace 1705 was Glastonbury
not already a corporate town, governed by all the paraphernalia of
mayor, aldermen and burgesses?

Wells, after all, had been recognised as a borough by Bishop Robert of
Lewes at some time before 1166, and Bishop Ralph of Shrewsbury two
centuries later had bowed to local pressure and accepted the master of
the community, later to be the mayor, to speak for and gradually to rule
his fellow citizens.

Bridgwater men after 1200 also gained power within their borough bit by
bit, and leading burgesses of both found themselves from the early 14th
century regularly sending representatives to Parliament, a privilege
which brought with it the obligation, as privileges usually do, to pay
them an allownace of 4d a day for so long as they were away from home.
The man prepared to waive that fee might well be chosen by electors who
put pocket before politics.

But still neither Wells nor Bridgwater had a mayor, and Bridgwater won
the race between the two by a mile when it persuaded the lord of part of
the borough, who also happened to be King Edward IV, to issue a charter
in 1468 incorporating the borough, providing it with a governing body of
a mayor, two bailiffs, and an unspecified number of burgesses. They
thought, deluded fools, that such a governing body was a guarantee of
economic success. Wells had to wait for a similar charter until 1589,
Bath until 1590. But why did not the men of Glastonbury (the women, of
course, had no say in the matter) agitate for such independence?

The Abbot still reigned
-----------------------

The answer almost certainly was that before the Dissolution the Abbot of
Glastonbury would not have countenanced such an idea. And yet in March
1319 the sheriff of Somerset and Dorset reported to the royal Chancery
that he had sent a writ to William de Grymstede, bailiff of the Liberty
of Glastonbury, requiring him to arrange for two men to be sent to a
Parliament summoned to meet at York in May; and in the summer of the
same year William Pacy, Adam the tiler, William Farrier, William Bowyer,
Adam Harding and William le Hert, describing themselves boldly as
burgesses of Glastonbury, wrote to the bailiffs of Bridport to declare
that Richard le Leghe, whoever he was, was an honest man.

True, the bailiff of the Liberty of Glastonbury was an Abbey official;
and true, he took no notice whatever of the summons and Glastonbury
never did send men to Parliament; but both the king’s officials and the
men of Bridport thought Glastonbury had some kind of existence
independent of the abbey.

And there is a bit more evidence pointing the same way, for men of the
town had been responsible for the corporate property of St John’s at
least since 1303. The magnificent collection of deeds belonging to the
church demonstrates how the churchwardens efficiently administered their
growing estate in the town until the end of the Middle Ages. How long
before 1303 they had this responsibility we shall never know, but by
1320 the wardens and parish together had a corporate seal to add legal
authenticity to their leases.

It took another century
-----------------------

It seems to have taken a century and more to progress further.

But there survives a deed of March 1424 by which Thomas Dunster and
Mathew Stokwode, the wardens, granted to William Lacy and his wife Alice
the reversion of an empty site on the west side of the graveyard between
the house of Thomas Porter on the south and the road through the
graveyard to the church on the north, measuring 33 feet by 50 feet, the
grant to take effect on the death of the current tenant, Clementine,
widow of John Aldenham. As normal there were two documents, the lease
and its counterpart, one for the new tenants, one for the wardens’
archives.

What makes this deed special is that one part bore the seal of the
wardens, the other what was described as the common seal of the vill of
Glastonbury. That same seal was later to be known as the seal of the
community and references to it occur throughout the 15th century. No
impressions of the seal have survived, so we shall never know what
symbol the burgesses chose as their own. I think I can guarantee it was
not King Arthur — he was abbey property.

Norbins and Archers Way
-----------------------

But there is more. On the Tuesday after Michaelmas 1448 Abbot Nicholas
Frome, never one to give anything away, granted to the burgesses and
community of the vill that under certain conditions they could hold a
piece of land in North field measuring 3½ acres, bounded on one side by
Northbynn, for a rent of 3/– payable by the churchwardens of St John’s —
a clear indication that the community the abbot recognised had been born
from the long corporate history of the parish church.

The conditions were that the community should enclose the land with
ditches, quickthorns and trees so that the men of the vill could
demostrate their keenness in shooting with bows, arrows and bolts rather
more safely than in the past. The origins of Archers Way may thus be
ascribed to an early outbreak of Health and Safety activity, though it
is equally possible that the uncertainty of the times — the outbreak of
the Wars of the Roses was not far away — might have led the abbot to
prepare his own private bunch of sharpshooters — which would, I suppose,
be an early example of modern government’s strategic partnership.

Democracy was not yet invented
------------------------------

But that is as far as town independence went — a community seal, but no
powers of self-government of any kind.

Instead in the centre of town in the early 16th century were clear
evidences of the abbey’s firm and propbably efficient exercise of
neighbourhood watch and community protection. There was Abbot Bere’s
newly built hall where the sheriff of the county came twice a year but
which was used much more often by the abbot’s own officers for the local
manor courts or halmoots, for the portmoots where market disputes were
heard and weights and measures checked, where the piepowder courts were
held to settle disputes at fair time. Under the hall was the gaol and
not far away was the Tolcester, the booth where checks were made on
brewers and ale sellers.

And that was all — nothing in the way of what President Bush would call
“Liberty” and “Democracy”.

Dissolution made it worse
-------------------------

And the dissolution of the monastery in 1539 offered no hope whatever,
for just as the abbey buildings were regarded as a convenient stone
quarry, so the abbey lands were seized upon first by the Crown and then
by Crown lessees who divided and sub-let to the confusion of everybody.

Within a century the manor, whatever that was, was divided into seven
parts, the grasslands parcelled out to the huge annoyance of local
farmers who had for centuries claimed common rights. Inevitably the
sales of leases forced prices much higher than locals could afford and
in 1613 the manor was said to be “intolerably defaced and impoverished”,
first by the sale of the home farm and second by granting so many leases
to foreigners, resulting in the neglect of houses within the town.

With all these anxieties no one gave a thought to local government,
though Sir John Sydenham of Brympton promoted a bill in Queen Mary’s
first Parliament in 1554 to make Glastonbury Somerset’s county town.
This was a challenge to the established county town, Ilchester, which it
met by acquiring from the Crown a charter of incorporation to revive old
rights and liberties, giving it a bailiff and 12 capital burgesses with
power to make “statutes and ordinances for the governance of the
borough” and to lay down “pains and penalties for the observance of the
same”. That charter kept Ilchester going as the county town for another
300 or so years.

Sydenham’s suggestion came to nothing; there were those who saw a large
element of personal vested interest in his idea which no amount of spin
could conceal — for he himself had been involved in supporting Thomas
Cromwell in the murky business of the closure of the abbey and had also
been partly responsible for driving out the Flemish cloth-workers who
had set up the beginnings of a business park among the ruins of the
monastery.

A century later, still struggle
-------------------------------

Glastonbury was still struggling at the end of the 17th century, a time
of political upheaval and religious intolerance if ever there was one.
The remarkable number of 175 houses in the town were so small as to be
exempted from paying hearth tax.

When the Duke of Monmouth and his followers came here in July 1685 they
must have been relieved that there was no awkward mayor to deal with as
they had found at Taunton, thanks to the political manipulations of the
government. Corporations, you see, were in a position to ensure the
right sort of people were successful at general elections, for they were
usually the controlling electors in one way or another, and the
government at the time was not happy with liberal-minded and often
Nonconformist Whigs who were suspicious of anything Anglican and Tory
and implacably hostile to anything smacking of Roman Catholicism.

So the idea that Taunton’s corporation should be revived was not
countenanced until 1677, when it was made clear that only those willing
to swear the Anglican oaths of allegiance and supremacy could be
members, and the king insisted that he should personally approve the
recorder and town clerk. Further, six county justices, Anglican and Tory
to a man, were made members, thus guaranteeing loyalty as the government
defined it. It was thus not surprising that Taunton’s mayor had to be
persuaded at the point of a sword to appear in public with the Duke of
Monmouth in 1685.

It was a similar story at Bridgwater, for in 1683 “by surprise and in a
surreptitious and clandestine manner’ the not-very-Tory corporation were
somehow hoodwinked into surrendering their charter. Their new one
cunningly limited the parliamentary franchise to the common council and
removed the recorder, an alderman, and ten burgesses whose support for
government policy could not be guaranteed. Surprise, surprise, the
election in May 1685 produced two Tory MPs. But as if hedging their
bets, a month later the Tory mayor and corporation formally proclaimed
Monmouth king. Their rather subtle punishment was to care for the royal
wounded for the next two years without any kind of government subsidy.

Whigs and Nonconformists
------------------------

Glastonbury at the time, so far as it is possible to see, had its full
share of Nonconformists and Whigs, though how far it supported Monmouth
cannot be known. It was the home in 1669 of nine clergymen ejected from
the Anglican fold, one of whom had a following of 300 using a converted
barn. Later in the century smaller, and often poorer, groups set up
meeting houses throughout the town. Quakers were probably strongest at
the beginning of the 18th century with a meeting house on the south side
of Benedict Street.

Why did the town want a charter?
--------------------------------

But why, after years of unpleasant political turmoil, should the people
of Glastonbury want a charter with all its potential trouble and
expense? Why have a mayor? Was not the town well-enough governed by
those who in one way or another had been performing public duties for
centuries and who would continue for some time to come?

A town jury, which sounds suspiciously democratic, had probably chosen
two constables each year in succession to the medieval hundred
constables, to deal with law and order; five parish overseers had dealt
with poor relief from the end of Queen Elizabeth’s reign; by 1580, and
probably from the early 14th century when the conduit called Fabiansput
was named, the parish organised the three conduit wardens and their
plumber assistant, helping them raise funds with an annual beer festival
known as the Shrovetide ale; and until the 1870s the parish was also
responsible for highways. So what was there for a mayor and corporation
to do?

The point, as the petitioners of 1703 made clear, was a question of law
and order. The parish constables might be all right for neighbourhood
watch, but serious justice and peacekeeping was inconveniently and
inefficiently remote. It was in the hands of the county justices of the
peace who lived on their country estates and had their own local
interests — “much occupied elsewhere” was the phrase the petitioners
used. Anyone involved in the “complaints, suits and controversies” which
cropped up in any town would have to travel some miles and could not be
certain that the Justice would be at home; and the result, the
petitioners declared rather ungrammatically, was that “the morall of the
inhabitants are corrupt, and cavill and breach of the peace very
frequent”.

And the petitioners went for broke. Would the government through its law
officers issue letters patent for a mayor, recorder, aldermen and so
many capital burgesses to the number of 24 as several other of His
Majesty’s good towns in the county enjoyed? The answer, after two years
of waiting, was not quite so impressive: a mayor, seven capital
burgesses, and sixteen inferior burgesses, all named in the charter,
together with a recorder to preside over courts who might operate by
deputy, and a town clerk to keep records in some kind of orderly and
legal fashion.

The prime mover was Peter King
------------------------------

<figure>
<img src="../Billing002.jpg" alt="A man with wavy brown hair stands smiling at the camera. He is wearing a grey suit with a white shirt and a chequered silver tie. He wears a gold chain around his neck. His left hand is in his pocket. Behind him is a gold-framed painting of a man in old-fashioned clothing including a voluminous red-and-white-striped layer covering much of his torso and legs, and what appears to be a light-blue scarf. His hair is long, wavy and brown.">
<figcaption>

The portrait of Peter King in the council chamber still presides over
the business of the town. In the foreground is Tom Billing, the 300th
mayor.

</figcaption>
</figure>

If any single individual was responsible for Glastonbury’s charter, that
man was Peter King, named in the charter as the first of the capital
burgesses and also as recorder. He still appears to preside over the
business of the town, for his portrait hangs in the council chamber and
successive mayors sit beneath his gaze.

How he came to be involved is something of a mystery. He was, to be
sure, one of the leading lawyers on the Western Circuit and was regarded
by the great John Locke, his famous uncle, as the son he never had. But
King was a native of Exeter, brought up a Presbyterian, and Whig MP for
the rather corrupt Devon constituency of Bere Alston, a seat he shared
with another Whig lawyer William Cowper.

It is just possible that Glastonbury’s charter was the first step
towards the creation of another Parliamentary borough, two more
potential votes for the government of the day. Why, otherwise, should
this London-based lawyer be interested in a Somerset borough? There is
also another clue, for another of the first capital burgesses was Robert
King the elder, and among the other burgesses was Robert King the
younger. Were they, I wonder, related in some way to the King family of
Exeter, in the same way as Timothy Rood, another of the first burgesses,
was certainly related to John Rood of Exeter who had land in the
Glastonbury at the time?

Peter King was what was described as a Country Whig who, wisely
following the advice of his mentor Locke, had on the whole taken an
independent line in politics and was known rather as the most religious
man of his age who attended divine service three times on a Sunday and
often took over prayers from his chaplain. His strong moral principles
were well known, he had published an influential book on the history of
the Apostles Creed, and he was a founder member of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel.

<figure>
<img src="../../114/towncrest.jpg" alt="A depiction of a crest. A red Byzantine cross outlined in black is at each of the left, top, and right edges. In the centre is a blue shield, decorated with a gold and red mitre, behind which are two crossed gold crosiers. Two ribbons stream from the bottom of the mitre. Below the shield is a banner reading “floreat ecclesia anglicana”.">
<figcaption>

Did Peter King write the motto for Glastonbury’s town crest?

</figcaption>
</figure>

I am very tempted on all these grounds to suggest that the town’s rather
flamboyant motto *Floreat Ecclesia Anglicana*, suggesting in some way
that Glastonbury might stand as a beacon for the survival of the Church
of England against her political enemies, might be down to Peter King.

But King the lawyer stood for moral principle, and he risked his
political future in proposing a bill which sought to remove all
government officers whose posts had been created after the death of
Charles II nearly twenty years before; a massive attack, in other words,
on Whig quangos. He personally took the bill to the House of Lords where
it was massacred. About the same time he upset the Tory-dominated House
of Commons by maintaining that a voter prevented from exercising his
franchise at a Parliamentary election should have recourse to the common
law. For such even-handed behaviour he found himself courted by the new
Tory administration of Lord Treasurer Godolphin and Lord Keeper Cowper,
his fellow MP for Bere Alston. Was the Recordership of Glastonbury some
kind of personal reward?

In the event he soon became recorder of London, a far more influential
post, and was replaced as recorder of Glastonbury, and then only for a
year, by the pompous-sounding Fortescue Turberville. And a year after
him came Edward Phelips of Montacute, whose family had only recently
lost their interest in Langport borough. So still, in spite of the hopes
of the petitioners for the charter, the leading lawyer of the new
corporation had to be sought several miles away at his country seat.
Only in the 1730s did the town have a really local recorder in the
person of Davidge Gould of Sharpham.

But still, the mayor for the time being was a justice of the peace, and
the immediate past mayor served as the recorder’s deputy and was called
the justice. The mayor’s was an office of much influence for he could
veto any proposed new member of the corporation and he presided in the
usual absence of the recorder at the fortnightly petty sessions and the
quarterly general sessions to ensure that the “morall” of the
inhabitants were no longer corrupt and breach of the peace infrequent.

Not much is known about other early mayors
------------------------------------------

It is to be hoped that the first mayor and burgesses were such as the
petitioners for the charter had in mind, but I fear I have been unable
to find very much about them.

John Aplin, gentleman, the first mayor, may well have been the
stockingmaker in business in the town twenty years earlier and was
probably related to the Aplins of Shepton Mallet who were in the same
business. By 1704 he was only taxed on land in the parish since the very
acceptable law at the time allowed the taxpayer to pay on goods or land,
and who in his right mind would admit to valuable stock-in-trade rather
than a modest farm?

Among the first capital burgesses, Robert King the elder had been warden
of St John’s in 1696, was justice in 1707 and died in 1709; William
Vincent probably lived in St Benedict’s and paid more tax on his land
than John Aplin; Fitz Wrentmore, whose grandfather had been lessee of
the Crown inn about 1640, was married at St Benedict’s in 1686, had
stock-in-trade worth £100 in 1704 and at the first formal election held
under the charter on 1 September 1707 was apparently at the end of his
mayoralty. Thomas Mores, rather more farmer than tradesman, was his
successor and continued as a leading townsman at least until 1720 when
he both signed and confirmed the parish rate.

Of the original sixteen inferior burgesses Henry Bytham had been warden
of St John’s in 1703 and having graduated to the dizzy heights of
capital burgess was described in the parish register at his burial in
February 1728 as alderman, a title of course never mentioned in the
charter. Robert King the younger, mayor in 1712 and 1716, had land worth
£43 a year and died in 1720; Thomas Prew and Sylvanus Penny were each in
a small way of business, Samuel Downton was a soap boiler or tallow
chandler, John Wherrett a soap boiler, Thomas Bartlett possibly a
hatter. Most of the other inferior burgesses paid land tax in the parish
in 1704 though one or two names are not found at Glastonbury in the
rather poor records of the period. On the whole, though, the hopes of
the original charter petitioners for government by local people were
generally fulfilled.

Earliest records
----------------

About 1870 Mr S. Holman, the town clerk of Glastonbury, told Mr H. T.
Riley of the Historical Manuscripts Commission that the earliest records
of the corporation were “one or two Registers of the Proceedings of the
Council in the reign of George I’. Would that were true today, but
thanks to the antiquary Thomas Serel of Wells we have some notes which
record what he thought of interest.

It is not, I must warn you, a record of deeds carried out for the
benefit of the people of Glastonbury but rather of the proceedings of
the members of an exclusive gentleman’s club, for the corporation was a
self-electing oligarchy with no popular mandate and no incentive to help
anybody but themselves. They may all have been respectable, godfearing
wardens of St John’s in their turn, concerned for the poor and less
fortunate members of their community, but as members of a corporation
they were navel-gazers, in practice without power to do very much since
they had no corporate property, not even a town hall (they met for many
years in a building called either the guildhall or the church house) and
therefore no corporate income.

Towards the end of the 18th century they do seem to have shown some
spark of conscience in doing what they could to support the parish
officers, but apart from peacekeeping they had no public function. So,
like members of any such body, they often had nothing better to do that
fall out among themselves or were overcome with lethargy and allowed the
energetic among them to run the show.

Little in the notes
-------------------

Using Mr Serel’s notes, and not realizing that that is what they are,
one might be forgiven for thinking that in some years there was no mayor
at all. It was not a task to be undertaken lightly and when Francis
Blake was prepared to take office nine times between 1727 and his death
in 1768 one can assume that the rest of the corporation were content.
The same contentment I assume allowed them to appoint three members of
the Gould family of Sharpham in succession as recorder or deputy and
they served between 1735 and 1794.

The town clerks, on whose shoulders rested the task of recording the
corporation’s business, should have been significant figures, but the
loss of those early records means that even their names are not
completely known. Yet in 1765 John Strode was prepared to resign as an
inferior burgess in order to apply for the vacant job of town clerk in
the place of Thomas Prat. It was a post John Strode thought worth
holding.

And there are several other items in Mr Serel’s notes worth mentioning:
one, under the year 1766, when a treasurer of the corporation was
mentioned and when the business of the town’s conduit wardens was
discussed; and the other, presumably with their law-and-order function,
was a list of the town’s inns — the New Inn, the Red Lion, the Crown,
the George, the Cock, the White Hart, the Bell, the Shoulder of Mutton,
the Tor Hill, the King’s Head, the Shoemakers’ Arms, the Three
Horseshoes, the Queen’s Head, the Anchor, Splats, the White Cap, and the
Colliflower. What the corporation proposed to do with this list is not
made clear.

A decade of asserting — or overreaching — themselves
----------------------------------------------------

But ten years later they seem to have been prepared to throw their
weight around. They resolved in 1777 to enforce the payment of the
parish rate to repair the conduit and its pipes, though they had no
legal authority to do so. In 1781–2 they resolved to renew the lease of
the late James Davis’s house in High Street called the Corporation
House, though unless they were subletting I strongly suspect it was not
theirs to dispose of.

And in 1785 the town clerk had the nerve to record as if it were
corporation business the proceedings of a meeting at the George to
appoint waywardens, quite evidently the business of the parishes.
Perhaps the last was a mistake, for Daniel Follett Scadding was new to
the job as town clerk and did not last for long: he was dismissed “for
divers negligences made” and was replaced by John Conway of Wells,
gentleman, in August 1786.

Better records begin in 1786
----------------------------

Now the earliest original records of the corporation begin in 1786 and
at the beginning of the first volume is a list headed “Members of the
Corporation of Glaston”. It begins with John Bond, mayor in 1797, and
nine names are crossed through with the word “excluded” in the margin
against that of Thomas Barnard and “ditto” against most of the others.
Beside the rest are the letters G and U or V, and a few crosses. What
this is all about I haven’t a clue, but the rest of the book records the
often infrequent and badly-attended meetings of the corporation usually
held in a room or building called the Town Hall.

Most of the business is about membership of this exclusive club, not
about the public good.

There was a large turnout in June 1794 when Henry Bosanquet of Langford
Court was elected recorder in place of Sir Henry Gould of Sharpham who
had recently died, but no-one attended the meeting in April 1801. There
was similarly a full meeting in October 1813 when John Conway, the town
clerk and a resident of Wells, resigned after 27 years and was replaced,
according to the minutes, by Richard Periam Prat of Glastonbury as the
corporation had decided they needed a resident clerk.

An amplification of that minute rescued by Mr Serel revealed that the
mayor, Charles Brown, had wanted a friend in the post, no doubt to cover
his back, and wrote to Conway threatening his removal. At the meeting to
consider the appointment, Brown could muster only six votes for his
friend Mr Reeves, while Prat, proposed by an unnamed capital burgess,
received twice as many. The mayor thereupon made off with the only
official record of the vote and refused to summon a meeting to discuss
the matter.

Chasm between the two kinds of burgesses
----------------------------------------

There was, of course, a great gulf fixed between capital and inferior
burgesses, a fact that was made abundantly clear in the council minutes:
the capital burgesses were recorded as “esquires”, the inferior as
“misters”.

Much more research would reveal something about the social and economic
background of the corporation at the end of the 18th century, but I
suspect I am not far wrong in assuming that they were mostly landowners,
attorneys and surgeons, with just a few of the most prosperous
businessmen calling themselves mercers. It is no surprise that three of
the four directors of that brilliant enterprise the Glastonbury Coal
Company, John Roach, John Jeanes Roach and Charles Brown, should have
been members of the corporation. The fourth, and evidently leader of the
business, was William Moxham, a retired Bristol distiller.

The stockingmakers who had led Glastonbury’s economic boom for thirty
years were certainly not among the town’s recognised governors, though
one of them, John Payne, was elected a constable in 1795 and a currier,
John Russ, was an inspector of hides — inferior officers, who had to be
kept in their place.

Fines as a money-raiser
-----------------------

Finance, as I implied earlier, was a continuing problem, for the charter
gave the the mayor and burgesses no property to enable them to keep up
appearances. In the face of poor attendances and reluctance of some
people to hold office, fines for refusal to serve was a surefire source
of cash.

In October 1807 Mr John Bath preferred to remain an inferior burgess and
paid a fine of £10 to the Treasurer to avoid promotion, and John Jeanes
Roach as Treasurer paid himself the same sum not to be mayor.

It was all, of course, good for corporation funds. In 1811, 17 members
were fined a total of £1 2s 6d for being absent from a meeting. When
funds were particularly low it was agreed that anyone who refused to
serve as mayor must pay a fine of £20 — a splendid sum to add to the 10
guineas the silkthrowster John Dutch paid for his lease of the town
hall, £5 of which it was agreed to go towards the expenses of the feast
annually kept on the election of each mayor. We are getting near the
truth of the matter now.

And when cash was desperately needed, as when the maces needed
re-gilding in 1797, John Bond the mayor put up £5 and the rest was found
by the other members.

Conscience stirs at last
------------------------

By the 1780s, I am immensely glad to tell you, the corporation began to
have something of a public conscience, partly, I am sure, because the
same people were in any case involved in the public work of the two
parishes.

So the names of the conduit wardens began to be recorded at meetings of
the corporation. And in 1791 they went further, acting almost as if they
were lords of the manor: they nominated two constables and also a
tithingman for Edgarley, two goutwardens to look after the drains, two
portreeves, two shamblewardens and two searchers and sealers of leather,
thus claiming the health-and-safety and public-protection portfolios.

A year or two later and they nominated a tithingman for Norwood Park and
a high constable for the eastern part of Glastonbury Twelve Hides. All
quite without legal authority, but you know what politicians are.

As much concealed as revealed
-----------------------------

Those two minute books of the corporation on which I have been relying
so heavily conceal more than they reveal of the public work of the mayor
of Glastonbury.

But they tell us what the town clerk thought should be recorded: that,
for instance, two inspectors of raw hides and skins appointed in 1809
should examine what was brought into John Symon’s tanyard at Northover,
and that ten special constables were needed in the same year, probably
to deal with political demonstrations rather than overspill trouble from
Pilton.

They also state that 6d was paid in 1811 for red tape to tie up the
several acts of Parliament which were making the town clerk’s office
look untidy; that in the same year Mr Underwood and his son were
“frequently prevented” from going to Notleys’ or Blake’s well, the
origins of the town’s water supply; that in 1814 the walls of the horse
pound were out of repair and that Hanover Square, in the quaint phrase
of the time, was “annoyed by a dungheap”.

The big issue: the new town hall
--------------------------------

<figure>
<img src="../markethouse-Cannon.jpg" alt="A very old drawing of three faces of a building, laid out side by side as if unfolded. Grey and red are used for stone and brick, and green for the roof material. On the ground floor many arched entrances are visible, plus some rectangular doors. On the upper level are many windows. The roof looks to be very tall.">
<figcaption>

The old market hall, which stood in the middle of Magdalene Street, as
sketched about 1735 by John Cannon.

</figcaption>
</figure>

What really mattered over these years was the building which used to
stand in the street almost opposite where we are now, a two-storied
edifice which had served as a market house on the ground floor and as
town hall above.

The corporation first talked about removing it early in February 1811
and soon learned that Mr Dutch the tenant was proposing to remove and
sell the windows which filled its ground-floor arches, presumably to
encourage the use of the ground floor as a farmers’ market. Instead he
agreed to quit the property and leave the windows, which the mayor then
had removed.

Then the corporation had second thoughts and decided to ask counsel
whether they had power to pull the building down, sell the materials and
pocket the proceeds. Counsel evidently pointed out to them that it was
not their property at all but belonged to a Mr Reeves, a local attorney,
which was a bit of a blow. They would have to spend £150 to buy him out
and give him the materials into the bargain to get their own way,
justifying their proposed expenditure by declaring that the building was
a public nuisance.

Now enter the Down family, owners of land formerly within the abbey
precinct. John Down the elder, who just happened to be mayor at the
time, offered his fellow burgesses a plot 61 feet by 31 feet between the
Red Lion and a gateway belonging to his son for the sum of £100. I
suspect the district auditor was not consulted. Well, that put the
corporation in a dither. After six months of doing nothing they agreed
to build a town hall on the old site using some of the walls of the
condemned building unless within a fortnight the required sum of £100
could be “rose” (so the town clerk wrote) by subscription for the new
site.

Within four months they were meeting in the old building to consult
about a new market house and prison with a town hall above it,
presumably on the new site; and a note was added to the minute to the
effect that the new mayor and John Down had already agreed a contract
for the sale. Still there was little progress, though early in 1813 Mr
Beard of Somerton was approached to provide plans.

Naturally, more happened than is recorded in the minutes. When someone
looked more closely into the finances of the old market house it was
discovered that the owner of some land in the moors was charged to keep
its roof in repair. £200 cash down released him from that burden, but
£150 went on pulling down a house where the new town hall was to be
built. The hoped-for subscription for £100 actually raised £226.

By May 1814 the old market house had been demolished but its site was
being used by fly-tippers. Eventually the space it had occupied for so
long was conveyed to the Turnpike Trustees and was added to the street.

But how to pay for the new Market House, which may or may not by then
have been started, and which eventually cost about £1,250? Something
like £300 was needed in May 1814, and the corporation decided to raise a
mortgage on themselves: each capital burgess was to pay £2 every
Michaelmas and each inferior burgess £1. A meeting summoned at what was
called the town hall in December of the same year adjourned to the White
Hart to discuss raising a further £100. The adjournment, I am sure, was
because the building was nothing like ready.

Not until the summer of 1816 was any progress possible, when Thomas
Roach lent £300 for what was called the new town hall. It was, I
believe, finished by July of the following year, when Richard Smart was
summoned there to “shew cause why he should not be expelled as an
inferior burgess …for contemptuous behaviour … and other misdemeanours”.

Stirrings of reform afoot
-------------------------

You will agree, I am sure, that this was no way to run a growing town.
But it is a story which can be repeated throughout the country: an
unrepresentative body of men carrying on in a bumbling if not actually
corrupt way with nothing very important to do.

But times had changed. The country whigs who had secured the charter
back in 1705 had been changed out of all recognition into the reformed
whigs who had forced the great reform bill through Parliament and since
1832 had dominated the House of Commons. Municipal Corporations were now
in their sights and commissioners of enquiry began to ask awkward
questions.

It was difficult, they were told at Glastonbury and in many other
places, to make a proper selection of inferior burgesses though none in
finding a sufficient number of candidates — a very significant finding:
people wanted to join but were found not suitable by those already
members.

It did not look good when it had to be admitted that there was no
regular treasurer, that the town clerk had no salary, that the
quarter-sessions court had been virtually abandoned for want of
customers, that the Grand Jury consisting only of members of the
corporation had therefore nothing to do, but still attended, took the
oath, and were immediately dismissed; that members of the corporation
were still personally paying off the town hall debt.

True under an Act of Parliament of 1811 the mayor, recorder, justice and
capital burgesses acted as commissioners empowered to raise a rate for
paving and improving the town and another for watching and lighting.
Under that Act some large sewers were maintained and when in February
1835 “disturbances and depredations … took place in the town” a beadle
was appointed whose principal task was to look at the state of the beer
houses.

What did the government do?
---------------------------

The government’s answer to the main problem of unrepresentative,
self-perpetuating corporations was either to abolish them or to reduce
their membership in Glastonbury’s case to four aldermen and 12
councillors, one of them to be mayor, and to elect each alderman for six
years and each councillor for three. Business was to be conducted
through watch and market committees, finance through an independent
treasurer and auditors.

Over the next century and a half that corporation widened its interests
for the public good as national law required and as a succession of
distinguished aldermen and councillors led. That is another and
fascinating story.

And the 20th-century reform…
----------------------------

Another government, claiming like the 1832 whigs to be reforming,
decided, as governments are wont to do to, on change, and legislation
which came into force on All Fool’s Day 1974 stripped our corporation of
its historic status. I hesitate to say that it has returned to its
ancient role, for it is still an elected body, representing the people
of the town as it never did before 1835; but the maintenance and
improvement of this town hall is a continuing concern.

The good of the town is the purpose of the town council and its members,
in so many ways far beyond the imaginings of their municipal ancestors
three hundred years ago. That we are celebrating the charter at all is a
salute to those ancestors; and in such numbers tonight is a mark of our
appreciation of our distinguished heritage.

And we have a mayor of Glastonbury, of course, to control the morals of
the people and to keep the peace.

<address>

Robert Dunning\
BA PhD FSA FRHistS

Musgrove Manor East\
Barton Close, Taunton, TA1 4RU

</address>
