<figure>
<img src="../Queen+JB.jpg" alt="A woman in red and white upper-class early-modern-period dress sits on an opulent throne. She holds a dark red velvet-looking item in her gloved hands, and a purse hangs from her left arm. Two men stand beside her in navy and gold robes, holding staffs. In the foreground, on the right, an older man in a grey suit stands at the top of some stairs leading up to the level the others are on, facing them, and looks down at some paper he is holding.">
<figcaption>

Queen Anne hears John Brunsdon bring her up to date on the town’s doings
since she granted it a charter in 1705. The maces also date from then.

Muriel Mudie played the role at the Town Hall event organized by the
Conservation Society, where Dr Dunning spoke to about 150, including
VIPs. The macebearers are Michael King and Victor Jones. The April issue
[2005] of Somerset Life has a page of photos.

</figcaption>
</figure>

Perhaps the short answer to this question is that it seemed a good idea
at the time!

Robert Dunning, the county and Abbey historian, was able to shed some
light on Glastonbury’s elevated status and the early days of the
corporation, at an event in the Town Hall on March 30 organized by
Glastonbury Conservation Society to mark the town's Tercentenary.

By a charter sealed at Westminster on June 23 in 1705, Queen Anne
granted the town corporate status, which remained in force until the
Municipal Reform Act of 1834. Wells, Bridgwater and Bath had achieved
borough status long before, but Glastonbury since the dissolution of the
Abbey had been a backwater. Certainly, before that time the townsmen had
through the various parish officers managed the affairs of their
community. They even possessed a common seal, as well as property of
their own.

The Abbey, however, retained a firm control of local affairs and the
various courts that dealt with administration and disputes. Such
centralized local authority vanished in the decades after the
dissolution as both the physical and administrative aspects of the
institution were plundered and erased. An attempt in 1554 to make
Glastonbury Somerset’s county town came to nothing.

After nearly a century of religious and political turmoil in which the
town found itself directly, if unwillingly, involved, a petition for a
charter was made, largely on the grounds of better securing law, order
and local justice. Instrumental in the success of the campaign was Peter
King, a native of Exeter and a prominent Whig MP and lawyer. Why he
should have had such interest in Glastonbury is a mystery, but it is
possible that he saw the charter as a step toward creating a
parliamentary borough that would return two MPs.

<figure>
<img src="../Billing002.jpg" alt="A man with wavy brown hair stands smiling at the camera. He is wearing a grey suit with a white shirt and a chequered silver tie. He wears a gold chain around his neck. His left hand is in his pocket. Behind him is a gold-framed painting of a man in old-fashioned clothing including a voluminous red-and-white-striped layer covering much of his torso and legs, and what appears to be a light-blue scarf. His hair is long, wavy and brown.">
<figcaption>

Tom Billing became Glastonbury’s 300th mayor on May 11. He stands under
the portrait of Peter King, the borough’s first Recorder as well as Lord
High Chancellor.

The painter was Sir Godfrey Kneller (1648–1725), and, as the plaque
says, the work was donated to the Town Hall by the joint Ladies of the
Manor of Glastonbury Twelve Hides. <span class="ednote">Photos by Jim
Nagel.</span>

</figcaption>
</figure>

The corporation set up by the charter did not perhaps fulfil the desires
of the petitioners. It created a Mayor, who could veto any proposed new
member of the corporation and who usually presided at the petty and
quarterly general sessions; a Recorder (the first being Peter King); a
Town Clerk; eight Capital Burgesses and sixteen Inferior Burgesses.
Nearly all the members of the corporation were gentry, landowners,
lawyers or tradesmen and formed what in essence was an exclusive
gentleman’s club: the body was a self-electing oligarchy with no popular
mandate and no incentive to help anybody but themselves.

The corporation had no property and no corporate income, and indeed no
real functions apart from peacekeeping. When they did stir themselves to
action, it often rested on no legal authority.

Unfortunately the early records of the corporation are lost, but for
notes made from them by a Mr Serel. Surviving records begin in 1786 but
reveal little activity apart from internal elections. Their role began
to increase as the century wore on, and as a result of their efforts, by
somewhat questionable means, the present Town Hall was eventually
constructed and completed in 1817 to replace the unsatisfactory Market
House, which stood in the middle of Magdalene Street, in front of the
present Town Hall.

As in so many fields, the Victorian era brought reform and the
Glastonbury Corporation was duly modified in 1834 and at last began to
undertake the tasks that perhaps the petitioners had hoped for back in
1705.
