<figure>
<img src="../brunsdonMBE.jpg" alt="A man with short white hair and thick-rimmed glasses smiles at the camera. He wears a black jacket over a white collared shirt and patterned tie. He holds a medallion held in a presentation box.">
<figcaption>
John Brunsdon at Buckingham Palace with the MBE insignia he received
from the Prince of Wales, “for services to conservation in Glastonbury”.
</figcaption>
</figure>

For most people the national honours system is something of a mystery.
Certainly for me it was a whole new learning experience. Out of the blue
arrived a letter from 10 Downing Street informing me that I had been
nominated for an award — would I accept? but I must keep it a secret.

In due course my name appeared along with others in the Queen’s
birthday honours list: an MBE for services to conservation in
Glastonbury. Several months later a letter from St James’s Palace
invited me to an investiture on October 15 at Buckingham Palace. I am
advised what to wear, that I can bring three guests (only) and that I
must arrive between 10 and 10:30am, show my invitation letter, guests’
named tickets and car pass. We decided to travel by car, starting early
to allow for the rush-hour crawl near London.

Security was tight outside the palace, with the car closely inspected
before being allowed to park in the quadrangle. The guests were
separated from recipients, who were directed through spacious halls and
staircases to large rooms lined with the royal collection of paintings.
All cameras and telephones have to be left at the cloakrooms.

Before long we were given a rehearsal of the investiture and put at
ease. The Prince of Wales was to officiate, assisted by aides, marshals
and guarded by gentlemen at arms (Beefeaters) and two Gurkha officers —
a tradition dating back to Queen Victoria.

At 11am Prince Charles entered the State Ballroom and the investiture
commenced. We were escorted in small groups placed in the right order to
receive our awards. Those of us awaiting our turn could watch progress
on television screens, so we were well rehearsed. I was 105th out of
120.

Prince Charles spoke to every recipient for around 45 seconds. He
asked me if the festival caused problems in Glastonbury. I replied that
it was actually held several miles down the road, but that some
individuals did stay on longer on the Tor. He then hoped the award would
encourage my efforts, shook hands — which is the cue to bow and depart —
and then it was the next recipient’s turn.

All this time music was being played by a military orchestra in the
gallery.

My lasting impression of the occasion is how well organized
everything was, and how humbled I felt by the efforts of the other
recipients in so many spheres — civil, military and overseas.
