Around 27 members and friends turned out for the Glastonbury
Conservation Society’s annual general meeting on October 20 at St Mary’s
Hall.

The question of tree-planting arose from the minutes of the previous
AGM: should the society double its radius for this activity? Five miles
from the Market Cross is the present remit. The chairman said the
committee suggested bringing the radius in line with the facts, namely
10 miles. Janet Morland suggested that tree-planting should give
priority to schemes within five miles of Glastonbury. Ian Rands said
that Wells Civic Society had asked for help, also Brookside School at
Street for its 25th anniversary and the International Tree Foundation.

Bill Knight, a founder member, felt we should not concentrate our
efforts beyond our remit and that perhaps Ian Rands’s brilliant
achievement should be contained within a separate committee. Dennis
Allen confirmed that tree-planting finances were kept separate in the
accounts. The chairman said there had been unfortunate controversy over
a donation to Glastonbury in Bloom.

After further discussion, Martin Blake proposed that *the rules should
remain as at present (5 miles) while keeping powers for the committee to
authorize special cases*. This was seconded by John Morland and carried
unanimously. John Brunsdon said Ian Rands would in future bring
tree-planting schemes to the committee sooner.

Chairman’s report
-----------------

John Brunsdon pointed to the October newsletter
for his summary of the year’s activities. He thanked committee members
for their hard work, including Lizzie Knight for footpaths (which she
wanted to give up) and Jan Morland for seven years as secretary, also
Dennis Allen as treasurer and Ena Allen as membership secretary.

Trees
-----

Ian Rands thanked John Brunsdon for hospitality for committee
meetings. The 25,000th tree had been planted this year. He thanked
tree-planters and the donors of trees.

Accounts
--------

Dennis Allen circulated the accounts and reported that the
society has 125 paid-up members and 25 memberships not yet renewed. An
additional 40 newsletters are handed out to interested parties. Martin
Blake suggested that the new committee could try to expand the
membership.

<figure>
<img src="../accounts.png" alt="A chart titled “Accounts for year ending 31 July 1999”. It shows the income and expenditure. Income totals £7,931.09 mostly from trees, and expenditure totals £8,009.40, mostly on trees. The closing balance is £20,657.00.">
</figure>

Officers
--------

The chairman presented Jan Morland with a small token of
thanks for her services as secretary, which she said she would
gratefully spend on the garden. Jean Pike proposed Janet Morland as
secretary, seconded by Keith Mathews. (Janet is the daughter of Margot
and Stephen Morland, founder members of the society.) Similar motions
resulted in further terms for the other officers. Three new members of
the committee were proposed: Alan Fear, Adrian Pearse and Jo Joseph.
Other members were unanimously re-elected, namely Martin Blake, Neill
Bonham, Geoffrey Brunt, Roy Coles, Bill and Lizzie Knight, Alan Levitt
and John Morland. The committee will be looking for a new footpath
officer.

Other business
--------------

John Brunsdon had just come from a Town Hall meeting
discussing a planning proposal for the Morlands site; the problem of the
sewage works had not been resolved. Stephanie Morland said this would be
discussed at the public meeting next month on the Local District Plan.

The chairman said Bill Knight had raised the question of the
*Glastonbury* Conservation society: if people feel there are things we
should be doing, members should let the committee know.

Jim Nagel said the pavements in Glastonbury are in a filthy state,
compared to the sparkling new slabs laid only a few years ago. The
scrubbed pavements of Germany and the Netherlands put ours to shame. He
will research the cleaning methods used there. Chewing gum, said John
Brunsdon, is the main offender around St John’s church; the committee
would write to the local authority, which is responsible. Paul Branson
pointed out the damage caused to pavements by lorries parking on them,
also the problem of double-parking.

Jean Pike raised the question of more housing in the town. The chairman
said planning permission in Glastonbury was restricted because so much
land is of high amenity value or hardly above sea level, but the
government is obliging other towns to release land: Street will soon
merge with Walton. He said few local materials are used now, and
unfortunately it is not always apparent from plans what the buildings
will finally look like.
