Happy new millennium to all members and readers. We are sponsoring a new
iron **kissing gate** at the bottom of Bushy Coombe, as a special
project. A **town trail** is to be installed as a town project, using
pavement setts and occasional wall plaques.

We have planted a replacement **Holy Thorn at St Benedict’s** church to
complement our gift to St John’s. These will be tangible and hopefully
lasting enhancements by the Society. The mature thorn at St Benedict’s
had died and was felled. (Be careful to purchase the genuine plant if
tempted to have a specimen in your garden; otherwise you may be
disappointed to find your plant blossoms only once a year, and pink
instead of white!)

Meanwhile, English Heritage is spending money on **the Tribunal** — a
fine medieval merchant’s house in the High Street. Already the roof
timbers have had treatment for beetle infestation and the interior walls
have been painted with traditional limewash. Tests are in progress to
find the most suitable technique for cleaning the entrance stonework,
which is long overdue.

W S Atkins has published its intention to proceed with a three-month
experimental **pedestrian-priority** (10am to 4pm) in the High Street.
Our Society has a longstanding policy favouring pedestrian priority.
Nevertheless the misgivings of some traders are understandable. That is
why a carefully monitored experiment is essential.

Protectionist wrecking tactics by some Mendip councillors have again
delayed a decision on the **Morlands site**. No doubt any feasible
scheme would be welcome, but to succeed it must be viable and acceptable
to owners and planners alike.

Ian Rands has negotiated some good Glastonbury-based **tree schemes**
for this season, so please turn out and help.

We still need a coordinator for clearing overgrowth on **country
footpaths**. Volunteer, please — meanwhile all existing helpers, please
carry on your good work.

Under Mendip **Council’s experimental new system**, the Glastonbury and
Street area board meets to conduct all local business either at the Town
Hall or in Street. This is intended to bring local government closer to
the people. Members of the public can speak for three minutes on an
agenda item, giving 24 hours’ prior notice. Meeting times will be posted
at the Town Hall.
