Adrian Woodhall, guest speaker after the AGM in October, has been
responsible for three years as countryside manager for the National
Trust, covering an area of 2,000 acres from Sand Point to Glastonbury
from his base at Winscombe. Although the Tor consists of only 80 acres,
this site takes up a lot of his time.

The Tor, the distinctive conical hill with the remains of St Michael’s
tower, is an international symbol signifying Somerset. It was acquired
in 1933 by the National Trust, which gradually added other small fields
nearby. This land will never be built on. The trust has been asking
people what is important about this site, and in the main the views of
the trust and of visitors overlap.

A map of 1860 shows four distinct orchards circling the Tor. The field
called Elephante was planted in the late 19th century (and was recently
replanted by the Conservation Society). Under the Countryside
Stewardship, with money from the ministry of agriculture, hedgerows and
orchards can be replanted, and £3,000 this year is being spent on
renewing fences. Sheep are eating the bottom of hedgerows and will
eventually debark the hedge, so these have now been fenced.

The present entrance to the footpath is a mishmash of fences and gates
which the trust would like to replace with easier access for
wheelchairs. Any such plans will be published locally. The problem is
how to accommodate up to 3,000 people, the sort of numbers that came for
the August eclipse — a well behaved group of people of all ages enjoyed
the occasion. The path made in the 1970s is fairly robust, but the trust
hopes to provide passing places. An archaeologist will be involved in
this. The southwest needs repair. The trust would like to expand the
grass on the top of the hill with mesh reinforcement but must protect
the footings of the tower.

The 25-acre field around the Tor consists of unimproved grassland with
ladies bedstraw and 15 species of butterflies. Somerset Wildlife Trust
assesses it as wildlife status, though not a site of special scientific
interest (SSI). It is impossible to mow and must be grazed by cattle or
sheep, but sheep are vulnerable to dogs. Between May and July there was
no grazier and rank grass grew, but the new grazier has introduced dry
dairy cows, which will eat this. Thistles are spot-sprayed (though the
public objects) and rabbits are shot to avoid erosion.

This year two climbers, Kit Henry and Alison Cheshire, who are
experienced surveyors working on ancient churches, used an airgun to put
a small line over the top of the tower. They took stereo photographs
leading to detailed drawings, so that the trust can keep a close watch
on virtually every stone. Cracks were discovered on the top lintel,
where the Victorians used cast iron, and there will be a programme of
repair and repointing. The statues proved to be in amazingly good
condition.

Plans are to improve entrances and interpretation in 2000, footpaths and
apron in 2001, and repoint the tower in 2003, which will involve
scaffolding. The problem is that most visitors come between mid-June and
the end of September, but there must not be frost when using lime
mortar. This last repair will involve great expense and a major appeal.
It is hoped that many businesses who use the Tor as their symbol will
contribute.

Among questions after the talk and slides, Paul Branson asked about
parking, which Corfe Castle had solved successfully. Mr Woodhall replied
that the trust does not want any buildings near the Tor; a visitor
centre could be sited in the town with a good park-and-ride system. It
might be possible to institute one-way traffic for the lanes near the
Tor. He said there have been 35 separate camping incidents where people
brought their kit in the back of a van, parking in the lane and cutting
down trees for firewood. During big occasions like the solstice, three
or four wardens are needed, and six people at Glastonbury help. Jan
Morland said she has a slide showing John Brunsdon silhouetted through
the open arch of the Tor, with his litter-picker and sack.

Martin Blake, chairman of the Wells and District local association of
the National Trust, wished to encourage membership of the trust. The
group has 400 members with a programme of six lectures in Croscombe
village hall during winter and expeditions in summer. Members also raise
money and gave £3,500 to the trust during 1999. Mr Woodhall added that
the Wells association is very supportive, and Weston and Bristol also
have local groups.

Millennium celebrations included Serena Roney-Dougal’s idea of planting
700 flares to outline the Tor, sponsored by the public at £5 each. Each
flare lasted up to four hours, and the spectacle was stunning up to five
miles away.
