I was most honoured to receive the MBE in the Queen’s birthday list for
services to conservation in Glastonbury. I like to think of this award
as recognition of the collective efforts towards conservation in our
town. To achieve at any task, one does well to emulate the example of
others.

People like the late Col. Hugh Gould, who did so much on the Tor
National Trust committaee, and Dr Malin Boyd, who started our
Conservation Society, were an inspiration while I was still a young man.
Our late president, Stephen Morland, gave great encouragement and
financial support to the Summerhouse Orchard Housing Association.

Others are fortunately still with us — people like Neill Bonham, whose
early chairmanship of the society and meticulous research work on our
historic buildings gained listed-building protection and later
conservation-area status for our town.

Tree-planting, started in St John’s carpark by Barrie Hudson and
continuing under Ian Rands, has become our great strength. Others have
gained awards, like Geoff Brunt for his work on the Poldens, and Martyn
Godfrey’s vision that the railway canopy could continue to be of service
in St John’s Square market. Then custodians and trustees come and go at
the Abbey, Chalice Well and Abbey Barn, leaving their contributions to
these important places.

If I were asked where my particular interests lie, I think it must be in
the country footpath network around Glastonbury. Getting the paths open
and usable again after the war years of neglect involved a lot of work
but has given endless enjoyment for country lovers — and of course the
Tor!

(PS: the footpaths are open again, so please resume your clearing work!)

**Bovetown in bloom:** Many thanks to Alan Gloak and Colin Wells-Brown
for another splendid evening in their lovely garden at Coombe House,
Bovetown, on July 26. The weather was perfect and the glass of wine most
generous. Your chairman was sorry to have to leave early for church
bellringing practice!

**National Trust Tor appeal:** Work on improved footpaths and entrances
is well advanced at the Tor. Local builder Don Cribb has again made use
of his ingenious trackway for lifting stone and other material up the
steep slope. Please support this important conservation project.
Leaflets with donation forms are available at the Town Hall and High
Street shops. John Morland is donating a watercolour painting to be
raffled in aid of the fund.

**Canopy:** The railway canopy in St John’s Square carpark is having a
repaint — the first since 1985, so it has done well.

**Pride of Place:** Meanwhile we have heard from Gordon Michell of the
David Knightly Trust. He is standing down after administering the Pride
of Place awards for 21 years and is to be replaced by Gillian Binks,
until recently director of the Centre for Environmental Interpretation
in Manchester. The trustees have asked her to prepare a leaflet
illustrating the aims and criteria of the awards scheme. £150,000 has
been given to help 101 projects. We have supplied colour photographs to
be included in the pamphlet (thanks to Mendip council).

**Traffic:** Walton and Ashcott are due for a bypass if plans are
approved and funded by central government. Your chairman, wearing a
Mendip Councillor hat, pleaded strongly at a recent meeting for more
urgent attention to problems on Coursing Batch, Chilkwell Street, Bere
Lane, Fishers Hill and Street Road in Glastonbury, where both residents
and visitors are at risk from heavy A361 traffic thundering through the
Conservation Area past tourist attractions.

**Carpark trees:** Work is going on in St John’s carpark to install a
surveillance camera behind the Tribunal. Suggestion has been made that
this would be an opportunity to plant another tree instead of simply
asphalting the new traffic island. At the bottom of the carpark, the
group of plane trees planted by the society some years ago may have to
be reduced to one, as their roots are heaving the tarmac. In Northload
carpark, one of our trees was removed when the new toilet block was
built, and we are asking about replacing it.
