1989
----

Clearance and refencing of Wearyall copse. Grants available from county
council to mark its centenary. Copse replanted with oak and ash, winning
a Civic Trust competition. Trees and landscaping at new rugby club off
Lowerside Lane.

1990
----

Wearyall Hill copse extended. Mendip consults us about extending the
conservation area. Drive to plant more trees. Enhancement of the town
centre after the relief road discussed.

<figure>
<img src="/img/cons-area-map.jpg" alt="Map of the Glastonbury Conservation Area showing a large area including the town centre, abbey ruins, and tor, shaded in green.">
<figcaption>

The Conservation area — shaded green on this map — was finally
established in 1976 after stuggles with the old Borough Council. It was
extended in 1991 to the Tor and Bushy Coombe.

</figcaption>
</figure>

1991
----

Somerset Building Preservation Trust launched. John Brunsdon joins board
of trustees representing civic societies. Vera Matthews gives up
newsletter editorship after 15 years. Secretary Jean Gibson dies, also
longstanding member Philip Lucas. British Telecom awards £3,000 for
planting 10,000 trees on land around Glastonbury. Conservation Area
extended to include Tor and Bushy Coombe. Huge planting in Tree Week
includes 40 cedars at Butleigh avenue.

1992
----

First cemetery chapel restored, welcomed by society; work by Rowley
Bisgrove. Also Middlewick Farm conversion to holiday apartments by Roy
and Avril Coles (visit by society). Royal Stuart coat of arms discovered
by Neill Bonham at St John’s Church. BT Community Pride award for
planting cedar avenue. Ten oaks planted along Street Road. President
Stephen Morland to become a freeman of Glastonbury. Minor enhancement
scheme at St John’s carpark by Mendip. Work starts on the western relief
road. 21st birthday of the society and 90th birthday of president
Stephen Morland celebrated by dinner in the Town Hall, preceded by a
tour of the Abbey with Stephen. Barrie and Vera Mathews retire to the
south coast.

1993
----

Death of president Stephen Morland. Railings to be reinstated around St
John’s Church; society donates £500. Roy Worsket recommends
pavilion-style library at front of St Dunstan’s carpark — never
implemented due to controversy and cost! Rook Lane chapel at Frome
renovated — major scheme by Somerset Building Preservation Trust (JRB is
a trustee).

1994
----

Town-centre enhancement options debated. Listed romanesque fountain in
Lambrook Street restored by Mendip. 120 oak trees planted in lines at
Wick. Increasing concern over lack of progress on Morlands site. Bid to
Rural Development Commission fails. Vice-chairman Ian Rands reports from
Mendip Environmental Forum. Mendip publishes guidelines to shopfronts
(long requested by our society). Treasurer Dennis Allen serves as mayor.
Survey of footpaths for County Milestones Approach Project. Jan and John
Morland promote bright colours for the High Street. First of the annual
visits to Coombe House gardens, courtesy of Alan Gloak and Colin
Wells-Brown. Death of Margot Morland and Muriel Jacquemar. High Street
enhancement proposals unveiled.

1995
----

Civic Trust study on town-centre regeneration announced; coordinator
David Williams. Memorial walnut trees planted at Abbey for Stephen and
Margot Morland. Northload Street and town-centre enhancement completed.
Western relief road opens. St George’s Hall ramps and railings
completed. Mendip scheme for enhancing shopfronts commences. Northload
carpark enhanced.

1996
----

Death of tree volunteer Dick Alderton, also of Betty Boyd, widow of
society’s founder, and of Freeman Edith Rice, and of founder member E.
Jackson-Stevens. £950 awarded from Civic Trust’s local-projects fund for
tree planting. Market Cross restoration. Bumper year for painted lady
butterflies. Shopfront enhancement continues, especially transforming
Nisa to Heritage Fine Foods.

1997
----

Abbot’s cope from 1440 cope restored and on display at Abbey museum. New
lake dug at Abbey. Footpath diversion at Higher Wick Farm. Tribunal
(merchant’s house) leaflet by Robert Dunning. Glastonbury in Bloom takes
off! Crown Hotel becomes Backpackers.

1998
----

Easter Cottage restored. Rethink on St Dunstan’s carpark as library
site. David Williams back to manage “Get Glastonbury Going”. Final year
of shopfront scheme, a great success story. Sustrans Willow Walk planted
with society’s help. Deaths of Reg Collett and Helene Koppejan. “Talk
about Tor” consultation for new conservation plan. Third prize in Civic
Trust’s “Living Places” photo competition.

1999
----

John Brunsdon 25 years as chairman. Mortuary crosses restored by Friends
of St John’s Church. Jan Morland steps down as secretary. Glastonbury
transport strategy report of questionnaire survey. New library proposed
for Archers Way. Glastonbury second in Mendip in Bloom competition.

2000
----

New Holy Thorn at St Benedict’s to complement the one at St John’s.
Millennium kissing-gate donated at bottom of Bushy Coombe. Death of bird
lady Sheena Rees. Millennium Town Trail planned. Death of Gordon
Browning, maker of Glastonbury chair. Glastonbury won Mendip in Bloom
for third time in five years. New library opens.

2001
----

John Brunsdon made freeman and MBE. Geoff Brunt gains SSSI award for
work on Poldens. Launch of Tor appeal for £250,000. SW Regional
Development Agency buys Morland site; all existing plans withdrawn. SRB
(Single Regeneration Budget) bid successful; projects go forward. And
you are reading the 100th newsletter.
