<figure>
<img src="../trees-1989award.jpg" alt="A group of 10 people in semi-formal attire look at the camera. Two of the men near the centre hold up an oversized cheque on which the word “telecom” is readable.">
<figcaption>

August 1989: An award for fencing the Wearyall copse and planting 450
forest trees. From left: Toby Beaumont, Ian Rands, Maureen Luckes
(part-owner), Stephen Morland, Brian Vesey of Civic Trust, Gerry Andrews
of County Hall, David Davis of British Telecom, John Brunsdon, mayor
Mike Free.

</figcaption>
</figure>

For the 100th newsletter it seems appropriate to indulge in a happy
reverie concerning the tree-planting sites and the tree-planting people.

I remember two large schemes, one at West Pennard and one at the
Bretenoux Road, which Geoffrey Brunt organized involving children from
Millfield — and our members.

Many recipients have cause to be grateful to Mr Tom Todd up on Beech
Barrow, above Wells, who has given us over the years more than 800 young
beech trees.

John Morland, Dennis Allen and Toby Beaumont will certainly look back
with dread at the way we all slaved away to clear brambles and elder in
the Wearyall copse before planting 450 forest trees, followed by a
further 250 in the copse extension in the following year. Look at those
trees now! They are a fine sight.

See the replacement trees in the cedar avenue at Butleigh. We won many
prizes for this scheme, but what many people did not know was the hard
work that went into watering the 68 trees in a summer just as hot as
this year. I can still see Dick Alderton and Hilary Shakespeare dashing
to and fro with buckets — and many others of us.

Neil Bannell of West Bradley collects seedlings, brings them on in his
beautiful garden and then gives them to us for planting. Last year alone
he gave us more than 70 forest trees.

Have a look at the row of ash and the “butterfly mound” and the
marvellous hedge at the Tor Rugby Club. Barry and Vera Matthews were
there, and Ruth Miller from West Pennard.

<figure>
<img src="../trees-1989wickoaks.jpg" alt="Two men in a field, planting trees.">
<figcaption>

The first oaks at Wick were planted in 1989.

</figcaption>
</figure>

Oak trees in cattle guards we have planted on Wick Hill, by Wollyer’s
Bridge, Butleigh, and along the Street Road. The oak row from Paradise
Lane down to Wick Lane has 135 trees, stretching a mile and
incorporating the ancient Gog and Magog. Most of your tree-planting
members have been involved in replacements and repairs for many of these
trees and cages.

If you drive along the Dunstan’s Dyke, or the Watchwell Drove, or if you
walk along the river bank between Cow Bridge and the Plunging, you will
see our rows of withies — cold work in windy places for Brian Dicketts,
Keith Matthews and for John Anscombe. He and I were the last two left on
parade one February morning as the blizzard blew horizontally past us.
How many withies? More than 260.

Our total of standard fruit trees, mainly traditional cider apple, is
now at more than 900. Planting these is our hardest task. The trees are
ten or more feet tall, have eight-foot stakes and six-foot cattle
guards, ties and spacers. Alan Fear, Joe Keers and Richard Raynsford are
stalwarts on the wonker for driving in the stakes, and Adrian Pearse is
our patented digging machine. We have put in these trees (many within
sight of the Tor, and over a hundred with the National Trust) in Lower
Westholme, Bulwarks Lane, West Pennard, Compton Dundon, East Pennard and
Pylle.

And how do we get our grand total up to more than 27,000 trees? The
biggest schemes are for forest trees — in projects of from 70 to 1,500
at a time. Janet Morland usually walks or cycles to the site. Terry and
Ann Carmen are always on parade regardless of the weather. These
plantations can be seen at West Bradley, Pylle, East Pennard (the Gibbet
clump — now there’s a story on its own. Would you like to tell us,
Adrian?), Parbrook, the Bath and West showground, West Pennard and
Butleigh.

To everyone who has been out with us in all weathers, and many more than
I have mentioned here, may I (on behalf of the society) give my most
heartfelt thanks.

To all members, and readers, who delight in the beauty of trees, I would
say, “Go and have a look. You will be proud of what has been achieved.”
