<figure>
<img src="../Bromfield.jpg" alt="A man with side-parted white hair and glasses with thick black rims sits on an ornately-carved chair. He wears a mayoral collar over his traditional mayoral clothes, and several medals are displayed on the left side of his chest.">
<figcaption>
Brom served two terms as mayor, 1979 and 1982.
</figcaption>
</figure>

The death of our senior Freeman and outstanding local dignitary is a sad
loss to the town, to which he contributed so much.

John Bromfield was a Dunkirk veteran and former Chindit \[the special
forces against the Japanese in Burma\], renaming his house in Wells Road
Chindit House, where he lived with his first wife Laverne. This was the
venue for many excellent garden and house parties held to benefit the
numerous charities they supported.

Strangely, our paths crossed frequently in our earlier lives. Both of us
were educated at Ramsgate, though at different schools and at different
times. We both arrived in Glastonbury in the early 1950s, occupying the
same upper flat at Portway Farm, Street, after each other.

Brom pursued his career teaching at Millfield, coaching athletes and
notably Mary Bignall Rands, who was to become a champion Olympic
long-jumper. Brom and Laverne were houseparents at Chindit House with a
number of overseas students in their care.

Brom was first a borough councillor and later mayor of the town twice.
His mayoral church parades and receptions were most notable events. On
one occasion he invited an East African guest, who arrived in colourful
national costume. His guest asked what the task of mayor involved, and
Brom explained. His guest then asked if he was paid for the work, and
Brom said no. He then asked Brom if he received “considerations”. Brom
again said no. There was a pause, and the the guest remarked, “In my
country we get paid *and* we get considerations!”

Brom worked hundreds of hours for the town in his civic capacity for no
payment at all. Not only did he chair both the planning committee and
burial board for many years, but he researched and established the
rightful ownership of assets, particularly the allotments, wrongly
transferred to Mendip District Council when local government was
reorganized in 1973. This has greatly improved the financial standing of
the town council.

He also improved the status and dignity of the town council by personal
example, and he organized the restoration of the regalia: the pair of
silver gilt mace which were a personal gift to the town from Queen Anne
along with the borough charter.

I twice had the honour to act as deputy mayor during Brom’s terms
of office. It is significant that due to his conscientious attention to
duty I never once had to stand in and deputize. Instead it was the best
training possible to sit by him at meetings and learn from his personal
example.

Brom’s wife Laverne sadly died of cancer in 1983. In due course he
married Gudrun, who supported him so well in his British Legion and
Burma Star activities.

It was the greatest misfortune that Brom should suffer a stroke in March
1989, which necessitated his retirement from public life just as he was
preparing to join the county council. Gudrun’s devotion and support has
been outstanding, enabling Brom to live on for several years of greatly
restricted life.

Sadly we shall not see the like of him again but send our appreciation
and kind wishes to Gudrun and the family.
