Helen Weinstein, a BBC producer and research fellow at Magdalene
College, Cambridge, provided fascinating insights in her talk on May 23
into the life of John Cannon, a familiar figure in the Glastonbury of
the 1730s and 1740s.

John Cannon was born at West Lydford in 1684; his father was a small
farmer. Given a very basic schooling in the church porch, he rapidly
mastered reading and writing and developed a passion for books —
eventually resulting in the production of his own memoirs, but often
throughout his life either a means for self-improvement or the cause of
financial hardship.

<figure>
<img src="../markethouse-caption-cannon.jpg" alt="A very old drawing of the south, east, and north sides of a building, laid out left to right as if unfolded. Grey and red are used for stone and brick, and green for the roof material. On the ground floor many arched entrances are visible, plus some rectangular doors. On the upper level are many windows. The roof looks to be very tall. Below the drawing are many lines of calligraphic handwriting, whose contents are difficult to make out.">
<figcaption>
Cannon’s sketch and handwriting: “A large market house built by William
Strode Esquire out of ye ruins of a large vault in ye Abbey…” He had a
schoolroom in this building, which stood in the middle of Magdalene
Street.
</figcaption>
</figure>

Family problems meant that at age 13 he was sent to work in the fields
as a shepherd and ploughboy for £3 a year, but he continued to educate
himself and when aged 21 in 1705 qualified as an excise officer, which
brought him £50 per annum and 13 comfortable years, marriage, children
and postings around southern England. Extravagant book purchases led to
his getting into debt and his subsequent dismissal.

After a failed attempt to establish himself as a maltster in Bridgwater
he returned to Lydford in 1723. He taught himself the skills of a
scrivener \[which the dictionary defines as scribe, copyist or drafter
of documents; a notary\], and in the early 1730s was appointed Charity
School Master for St John’s parish at Glastonbury at £6 per annum, a
post which he retained until shortly before his disappearance and
presumed death in 1743.

As well as his teaching duties, Cannon provided legal and accountancy
services for the town and district, earning perhaps another £50 a year
by this means. His family continued to live at Lydford, while he lodged
in the town. He had an office over the porch in St John’s and a
schoolroom in the Market House, which stood opposite the present Town
Hall.

While in Glastonbury he produced his elaborately handwritten memoir
designed in emulation of volumes he had read. His memoir was itself a
transcription and augmentation from three earlier versions, each of
which had outgrown the volumes in which they were inscribed. The work
contains his family history, descriptions, illustrations and historical
sections on places where he had lived, as well as news items copied from
newspapers and books, together with copies of his legal and business
paperwork. Written in an elegant hand in homemade brown and green ink,
it is a rare and astonishing survival, not just of his own life, but
also in the rich detail it provides of the locality.

Glastonbury features prominently — Cannon recognised the historical
importance of the Abbey ruins, and is dismayed at their steady
destruction, often using gunpowder, to provide building materials. He
resides at various hostelries and other premises in the town and
provides details of its shops and personalities. Parish meetings he
describes as lengthy and quarrelsome, and on one occasion mentions that
the Overseer struck the Mayor with a candlestick.

John Cannon’s tragedy was that he did not get on with people — having
risen from the level of his peers, he was useful to, but never joined,
his social superiors. Economic depression in Glastonbury in the 1740s
resulted in the loss of his teaching post. Soon afterwards, the memoir
ends and he disappears from the written record. Somehow his work was
preserved through the centuries that followed and is now available to an
appreciative audience. The manuscript, owned by the Somerset
Archaeological and Natural History Society, is kept at the county
archives in Taunton.

Helen Weinstein’s book on John Cannon is to be published next year and
an ambitious website is in the works. Meanwhile her main work on Radio 4
is *Documents* (Thursday nights starting late summer) and, with Kate
Adie, *Women in War* (this autumn).

<div class="boxout">

Excerpts from the Cannon memoirs
--------------------------------

### 1704: 20 years old — bellringing, courting and cupboard love

And now I being arrived to about twenty years began to think of other
concerns amidst our recreations for as we went abroad we must needs be
acquainted with some femals to Enlarge our pleasure & rouse our spirits
for most of my companions now had entered into the schools of Venus &
began to cast amorous glances on the Country Lasses which they met with
in their rambles.

One instance of this kind I cannot omit for once on a Sabbath day, we
Ringers concluded to go to Balstonborrough Church, not so much out of
Zeal to hear a sermon as for Ringing. And in order thereto, I being now
minded to be more spruce than my companions and willing to maintain an
old custom in that country (of wearing first of all a new pair of boots
and Spurs after being brought home from the Cordwainer), I put on my
boots & spurs & so went with my fellows to this church although not less
than 2 miles distance. But I must condemn myself of pride or affectation
of showing my finery about the legs.

After sermon was over, we had the liberty of the bells for a peal or two
after which we went into the Clerks and spent about 8d a piece then took
our walk friendly together as usual, but coming to a hamlet called
Southwood, our company divided after a few arguments to fix our
resolutions to Continue together until we were come to our respective
habitations, … but more on account of the young woman, our friendly
host his daughter, who was a clean, tite girl & had some share of beauty
& handling her tongue.

### 1707: Cannon leaves home for Reading to train as an officer of the Excise and describes the breakup of his bellringing group and the death of Nathaniel Withers

The morning approaching for my departure which now was more troublesome
and sorrowfull to my parents, friends, and acquaintance than hitherto
yet had been manifest nothing but sobbing and tears appeared with them
but more especially my sweetheart Mary to whom we again renewed promises
of fidelity which was to be expresst in constant letters which also we
engaged to be frequent in & So sealing our parting with a multitude of
briny kisses, I took my leave of them all as also of my native place for
a time. …

Thus was our long untied knot of Ringers entirely broke & dispersed
which had continued in a true perfect band of amity and unfeigned
friendship many years as have been already related. For Nathaniel
Withers died a little before this my departure having contracted a
violent strain of bruise in ringing at East Pennard the 4th bell by
himself, it having been a custom for 5 of us to ring the said bells
singly notwithstanding the pondrosity of them that it was commonly 8
mens labour to ring them. At the same time, I could ring the tenor with
great ease.

</div>
