“From out of the shadows” was the title of Michael Protheroe’s talk on
April 11, on the poorly recorded story of the Roman Catholic church here
during the four centuries between the dissolution of the Abbey (1539)
and the laying of the foundation stone of the restored
pilgrimage-church, the present St Mary’s (1939).

   This notable feature of Glastonbury’s townscape came to occupy this
very significant site, and to be built when it was, through largely
providential factors. One was the generosity of the once-exiled French
nuns, the Sisters of Charity of St Louis, who (living up to their name!)
donated the plot to the Clifton diocese in the 1920s. The nuns had
earlier failed to sell the adjoining “Priory” property (which they were
to occupy for some 80 years — initially running a laundry and orphanage,
and then a school which educated so many local children — until their
departure in 1984). Despite wartime restrictions the church was built of
Bath and Corsham stone. The vision and foresight of Bishop William Lee
were finally realized in its consecration in 1942. The parish priest at
the time was Father Michael Fitzpatrick.

   Otherwise, Glastonbury’s Catholic church might well have been a
postwar development (a 1960s concrete structure on Windmill Hill?)
rather than such a fine piece of architecture, so centrally located on
Magdalene Street and visibly in continuity with the town’s Catholic past
reflected in the Abbey ruins across the road.

<figure>
<img src="../oldStMarys.png" alt="A drawing of a stone building, seen from one corner. It is one storey tall. The two windows on the left wall are rectangular and quite short, made of three glass panels each. On the right wall, the part nearest the corner has a pointed roof with a single arched window near the top, and the wall continues to the right with no windows until the end of the building. In front of the building is a sign whose text is not readable, and in front of that a fence separates a small strip of land from us, running along the right wall of the building. Some trees are visible behind the building. Some text is written below the illustration (transcribed in the caption).">
<figcaption>
The first St Mary’s Roman Catholic Church in Magdalene Street was a
converted stable. The sketch is by George (Tony) Wheeler, of Street, a
parishioner who helped pull it down in 1938 to make way for the new
church. At right, with the nuns’ “laundry” sign by its door, is the
“Priory” (recently used as the Millfield pre-prep school). The footpath
toward Safeway \[Morrisons\] now runs between it and the new church. The
gable-end niche contains a statue by Eric Gill—Chalice Well has a
replica of it.

The artist’s writing below the drawing says: “The old Catholic
Church of St Mary’s, pulled down in 1938 to make room for the new church
commenced in 1930. Parish priest Fr. M. Fitzpatric.”
</figcaption>
</figure>

As an outlawed minority during Penal times, “Papist recusants” had
barely survived here. Michael Protheroe had assembled what scattered
evidence there exists, and quoted the antiquarian Revd Richard Warner in
1826 that there was “not one Roman Catholic resident” — “a somewhat
remarkable fact” in a place once “so identified with the Romish
religion”.

Catholicism’s return and eventual revival dates only from 1886, when
Missionaries of the Sacred Heart, an international order of priests and
brothers, bought the Tor House property and the Chalice Well grounds and
established a junior seminary and a chapel (they were there till 1913).
It was some 40 years before the number of local Mass-goers had grown
sufficiently for an extensive parish to be set up (even including
Somerton in those days). A grey-stone stable alongside “The Priory” was
converted into its first church.

The meeting (in the fine parish hall behind St Mary’s) concluded with
an animated exchange regarding the ongoing saga of the Eric Gill
*Madonna and Child* that originally graced the front of the old stable
church — with hopes expressed that it might in due course also return to
Glastonbury.
