John Money, a professor at the University of Victoria, British Columbia,
is working on an academic edition of the memoir of John Cannon
(1684–1744), and while engaged in research in the UK was able to shed
light on religious aspects of this most unusual man at his lecture in
St John’s Church on October 31.

<figure>
<img src="../JM-in-field_ap803-640.jpg" alt="A man who is mostly bald but with wispy white hair on both sides, squints in the light and smiles at the camera. He stands in a field with his hands in his pockets, with some large trees visible behind him. He wears a brown jacket, a chequered red and white shirt, a red tie, chinos with a brown belt, and brown shoes. A pair of sunglasses hang around his neck.">
<figcaption>
In a field near Lydford, John Money is revisiting some of the places
that John Cannon, “the poor man’s Pepys”, mentions in his 18th-century
memoir. Photo by Adrian Pearse.
</figcaption>
</figure>

Cannon’s memoir is overwhelmingly secular in content, and perhaps of
greater interest because of this, but he could not dismiss the context
of his life and times: religious and political upheaval for the 200
years up to his death had touched every town, village and family in the
land.

Cannon was intimately involved in the religious and political turmoil
around him at its lowest and most basic level, whether at Lydford or
Glastonbury, yet as a result of his thorough grounding in both
historical and religious literature he was able to view events around
him in a way very few of his peers could match. He could consider
circumstances from his knowledge of the Reformation, yet had to make
decisions affecting himself, his family and neighbours which in the
religious ferment of his times could have far-reaching and unpredictable
consequences.

John Cannon had mastered the Bible in both English and Latin by the age
of four, and when aged five was asked by Parson Jacob, at Lydford, “Who
made you?” He replied: “God did, but my mother and father found the
stuff.” His reading grounded him in Tudor history and the Reformation,
both in England and Europe, so that he came to regard the Anglican
church as the apotheosis of Elizabethan reforms.

However, he had Quaker cousins and Papist neighbours, and must have
been fully aware of the religious fanaticism displayed by zealots on
both wings of the religious spectrum. He is sufficiently astute to
conceal as much as he reveals about his religiosity; but there can be no
doubt that his knowledge was profound, as displayed by the use of hidden
religious symbolism in the layout of parts of his text. His beliefs
embrace the mediaeval world of superstition and magic as seen in his
acceptance of portents and his belief in the efficacy of the cure
arising from the touching of his mother for the King’s Evil by Charles I
when imprisoned in Carisbrook Castle in 1648.

He was an authority on the Abbey ruins at Glastonbury and deplored
their destruction, and his very sense of history could justifiably lead
to sympathy with the Catholic cause, and he was indeed accused of such.
He was also aware of the growth of Nonconformist sects and with the
recent memories of the extremes of Puritan zealotry could deplore the
extremist views of either Catholics or Protestants as threats to a
fragile established order. Indeed it was less than a year after his
death in 1744 that the crushing of the Jacobite rebellion finally set
the religious course that England was to follow.

The importance of religion to John Cannon can be illustrated by an
event near the end of his life. In 1741 he and his family were
impoverished and in distress. On Christmas Eve he walked from Lydford to
Bristol to sell some of his precious books, and raised 7 guineas. Rather
than buy needed provisions from this sum, he spent 1 guinea on a 1539
Great Bible, the first in English, and then walked home in the snow
across the then unenclosed Mendips, lost his way and almost perished. He
had to have the book; Tudor history was to him an obsession.

In many aspects of his memoir John Cannon is keen to present himself as
a modernizing man; his treatment of his religious dimension reveals just
how complex a person he was.
