The Glastonbury and Sharpham Joint Burial Board consists of town
councillors and a representative from Sharpham. The board was set up in
the middle of the 19th century to run the new Wells Road cemetery after
St John’s churchyard was closed to burials. An impressive gatehouse
entrance and two chapels were built — all Grade II listed — and the
grounds planted with specimen forest trees, now mature.

The land rises steeply, and there are splendid views across the levels
to the Mendip hills. The builder Rowley Bisgrove did a commendable job
restoring the chapels in 1992. One is still used for occasional
services, and the other as a workshop for a specialist monumental mason
who also does restorations.

The original cemetery land is fast filling up, so the extension land
above has had to be prepared for burials. This land had to be reclaimed
from Mendip council and it was consecrated by Bishop John Bickersteth
some years back. Our society did a tree-planting scheme at the top —
David Heathcoat-Amory MP planted a tree at the start. Now the trees are
getting established and the field — with mediaeval cultivation terraces
preserved — is a haven for wildlife.

It is such a beautiful area that the board has arranged for it to be
used for Green burials. For these, there will be no monuments, and the
sheltered natural feel of the space will be retained along with the
wildlife, carefully screened from the rest of the cemetery. Do have a
walk through the cemetery to the Green area — you will enjoy it.

Green burials use biodegradable urns and caskets, made from material
such as cardboard or wicker. Planting of wildflowers is encouraged. Fur
further information contact the town clerk (83 1769 between 10am and
noon) and undertakers as usual.
