<figure>
<img src="../assembly1999.jpg" alt="Steps lead up to a large arched double doorway to a stone building. The left door is wide open revealing the interior. Inside is a sign advertising “highest quality organic food” in the café. Some stairs to an upper floor are visible. Above the doorway a large sign reads “Assembly Rooms”. The right door has a slot in it. To the left and right of the doorway near its top are carved stones with the year 1876 divided between them.">
<figcaption>
Same open door, same solid stone steps, 135 years on at the Glastonbury Assembly Rooms.
</figcaption>
</figure>

The Glastonbury Assembly Rooms is 135 years old this year. It was
originally built to provide a permanent home for the Literary
Institution which held regular penny-readings at the Town Hall, but was
said by some to be “only the resort of boys and girls to flirt and waste
time.” There was some opposition to the working classes having the
opportunity to read and write at all, so there was “quite a question
whether the Corporation would continue their permission for the use of
their room.”

A group of public-spirited citizens resolved to build a new “Assembly
Rooms”, and formed a company in April 1864 to carry out this project.
Local people bought shares at £5 each to pay for the £700 construction
work, reclaiming some ancient Abbey stone and gargoyles at eaves level.
By that November it was open as a community centre. Music-hall, cabaret,
theatre and dances were the order of the day, and it became the centre
of social, literary, artistic and political activity in Glastonbury.

Right from the start it managed to attract notoriety. A newspaper
cutting from 1867 records an “abominable swindle and disgraceful
disturbance” at the Assembly Rooms, when a theatre company failed to
appear and the audience was presented with “one solitary individual” who
performed “some badly arranged conjuring tricks.” In 1889, when Home
Rule for Ireland was a violently divisive issue, a Liberal meeting with
the Lord Mayor of Dublin as the principal speaker was riotously invaded
by “The Blues”. John Morland (great-grandfather of the John Morland
recently retired from Glastonbury Galleries) is said to have beaten back
the intruders single-handed, while a policeman from Shepton Mallet,
trapped behind the front door, died of a heart attack.

<figure>
<img src="../R_Boughton-hg2.jpg" alt="A painting of a young man in profile. He has mid-length hair swept back, a straight nose, and no facial hair. He wears a light-coloured suit over a collared shirt. The painting is signed “CW”.">
<figcaption>
Rutland Boughton (1878–1960) as a young man.
</figcaption>
</figure>

The Assembly Rooms enjoyed its heyday during the years 1914–1924, when
the presiding figure was the radical composer and director Rutland
Boughton. The first British rural arts festival, the precursor of
festivals such as Bath, Cheltenham and Glyndebourne, took place in
Glastonbury and was based at the Assembly Rooms. The first, in 1914,
featured Boughton’s *The Immortal Hour*, later produced in London where
it enjoyed an unprecedented 216 consecutive performances — still the
record for an operatic production.

<figure>
<img src="../assm-boughton1916.jpg" alt="Actors in costume pose outside the same double doors (now closed) depicted in the photograph above. One actor is lying on the ground, while most of the others look on. One actor, the only one wearing white rather than dark colours, faces a different direction with arms raised.">
<figcaption>
Rutland Boughton’s 1916 production of Everyman:
a scene at the Assembly Rooms.
</figcaption>
</figure>

The Glastonbury Festivals were extremely popular and successful, though
they had to struggle through the First World War with an entirely
amateur local cast. “The Glastonbury Players” later performed all over
the country. The festival attracted names such as Bernard Shaw, Thomas
Hardy and D.H. Lawrence, and was greatly encouraged by Edward Elgar.
Dion Fortune wrote of how many well-known singers had made their debut
at the Assembly Rooms, while the twice-yearly festivals attracted
music-lovers from all over the world. Among certain residents of the
town, however, there was an outcry. Boughton lamented the attitude of
some people regarding “the satanic influences of the arts in general,
and the Glastonbury Festival in particular.”

Boughton’s uncompromising socialist ideology was to prove his downfall.
When offered a knighthood he had abruptly turned it down. His version of
the legend of Arthur is the only one that ends with a peasants’ revolt!
He had never, out of principle, conducted before royalty, and his
refusal to modify his approach in order to win would-be patrons resulted
in the failure of the Glastonbury Festival in 1924. The last festival,
under the direction of Laurence Housman, took place in 1926.

The Assembly Rooms had become infamous as a place frequented by
bohemians “wearing corduroy trousers”, or women with their hair too
short and men with theirs too long. With the Festival defunct, the
building quietly returned to being a venue for dances, sales and other
activities, still fondly remembered by older residents. The Literary
Institution continued as a penny library until the outbreak of the
Second World War.

In 1930 community activities moved into the new hall built onto the back
of the Georgian Town Hall, and in 1939 the Assembly Rooms was
requisitioned for the duration of the war. Canadian and American
soldiers used the building as a servicemen’s club, and the former
library at the back of the modern Glastonbury Framing shop was used to
“shoot crap” and play pool.

After the war Morlands bought the building as a sheepskin warehouse, and
by the 1970s it was a tip which many people considered beyond saving.
Ownership had passed to the county council, which had intended to
demolish it in order to build a road. However, the building’s potential
as a community hall led to the formation of the Glastonbury Assembly
Rooms Trust in 1977 and, with much enthusiasm and hard work, it
re-opened in June 1978 for the revived Glastonbury Festival.

The 1980s are remembered by many as one of the most exciting periods at
the Assembly Rooms, with community gatherings, homespun cabaret shows
and some of the most creative community theatre and music productions of
modern times. But a number of its neighbours found it too much of a
disturbance. The building had come to be managed by a loose association
known as the Friends of the Assembly Rooms and it was eventually bought
freehold, but complaints mounted up and never seemed to be adequately
handled.

The situation improved in 1991 when the management was reconstituted as
a Friendly Society, a new Assembly Rooms of Glastonbury Ltd with shares
owned by members of the community. Recent years have seen this
experiment in community management and ownership gradually evolve. In
1998 work was carried out to repair the roof structure and install
soundproofing, with help from the town and district councils. The next
phase of building work and improvements is now being planned in detail,
thanks to support from Michael Eavis of Glastonbury Festivals Ltd.

As in former generations, the Assembly Rooms continues to be popular
with some sections of the community while others regard it as
“dreadful”. This seems to be in the nature of the building itself, or
perhaps of the town of which it forms part. Whatever the case, those now
working at the Assembly Rooms see themselves as continuing in the
tradition of Rutland Boughton and others, and could make out a good case
for saying that modern productions there do indeed — as Boughton had
foreseen — “embody the real experience of men and women, with a musical
language rooted in English folk song.”

<aside class="ednote">

Condensed from a feature by our member Bruce Garrard (with help from
David Krepps, Nancy Hollinrake and Jan Morland) in the current issue of
his quarterly magazine Free State, £1.95 from Unique Publications or
various shops. (Sorry to give him a plug three newsletters running, but
he **will** continue to put out good stuff. —Ed.)

</aside>
