Congratulations to our Glastonbury in Bloom team for an excellent show
again this summer. Coming second to Street cannot detract from the very
high standard achieved with far more restricted availability of
resources. No doubt new ideas will emerge and blank spaces filled in,
but the team will be hard put to even maintain such a high standard. Why
not offer to give them a hand?

The **Town Traffic Study** presentations were well advertised and
attended, and the analysis of ideas put forward will be interesting.
Tables and chairs at the Market Cross have helped to endorse this
pedestrian area.

Generally the town has been full of visitors, and shopkeepers mostly
happy with their summer season’s trading. Certainly there are relatively
few empty premises, and with the economy set fair, long may this
continue.

At last we are rid of our dilapidated **litter bins** in the High
Street, with stronger and more secure replacements. Flyposting has been
unsightly and this must be removed promptly and reported to Mendip
council, which has been alerted to the problem. Likewise spray graffiti
has been a problem again. Please be alert and report instances at once.
There are resources in the town-centre fund to deal with it.

One of the mountain ash **trees at the Market Cross** will need
replacement. Fortunately the newly planted holy thorn at St John’s is
responding to spraying. Along with the the big thorn tree and others in
the town they have suffered a bad attack by fungal mildew to the point
of defoliation.

Very dry weather followed by torrential storms has put the town’s
**water drainage system** to severe test. The higher rainfall has
encouraged greater growth of grass and weeds to overhang and block our
country footpaths. Clearance under the Parish scheme has continued,
backed up by the advanced training unit. Several problem areas are
clearer in consequence.

**The Tor** has looked very overgrown this year due to high rainfall and
problems with stocking. Sheep grazing has now been augmented by cattle
again, and already the grass is better controlled. One bonus of
undergrazing has been a profusion of wild flowers. Next year we should
see more grass-feeding butterflies, especially the marbled white.

There have been a number of gatherings at the Tor during the summer —
for the solstice, eclipse and 99­9-9, in addition to the Roman Catholic
pilgrimage. Experimental road closure and one-way systems in Wellhouse
Lane suggest that a seasonal order would greatly improve the setting of
the Tor, less dominated by traffic.

Once again we are indebted to Alan Gloak and Colin Wells-Brown for their
generous hospitality. An evening spent in such a lovely garden is one to
remember, and the weather was kind during an unsettled spell. Many
thanks indeed.

All our **regular activities** have continued over the year. Meetings
with talks, tree planting and country footpath maintenance, and the
guidebook *Glastonbury Footpath Walks*, continue to sell well. No major
problems have occurred that could endanger our listed buildings, and we
comment on planning applications as appropriate. Numbers on our
membership list remain about the same. We are glad to recruit new
members, especially newcomers who may have settled into one of our
historic buildings.

The derelict **Morland site** remains the worst problem site in the
county in spite of efforts to resolve the matter. A planning application
is imminent.

Who knows what the **next millennium** will bring? Hopefully the town
will develop in a manner which will respect its historic Christian past
and prosper in doing so, and that Glastonbury Conservation Society will
have a role to play in this happening.
