<figure>
<img src="../bovetown-garage.jpg" alt="Four men of various ages stand on scaffolding in front of a tiled roof. They each hold a drink.">
<figcaption>

“We had our own topping-out ceremony,” says Derek Hankins, to equal that
for the town’s new library. “Both architect and builder succeeded in the
brief we gave them.”

</figcaption>
</figure>

I have been asked for some background about the new stone-built double
garage beside our house — Blake House, 3 Bovetown — on the corner of
Rowley Road.

We are conscious of the privilege of living in such an architecturally
unique old house. The outer walls of Abbey stone are some 27 inches
thick and were built more than three centuries ago. Francis Blake, a
mayor of Glastonbury and a distant relative of Admiral Blake, probably
gave the house its name.

At that time, our house and the adjoining house were one. It must have
been quite an imposing building owning most of the surrounding land. In
1900 it was divided into two dwellings and then, I believe, major
extensions were added.

Living in a Grade II listed building in a conservation area carries
responsibilities. Any alterations or additions to the property require
listed-building approval. This can be time-consuming and expensive but
is a price worth paying.

We had endeavoured for many years to acquire the small plot of land
where our new garage stands, and in 1998 we finally were able to
purchase it. The plot had long been an eyesore, covered in weeds and
grass, and a dumping ground for rubbish and a venue for the exercise of
dogs.

First, we needed a sympathetic architect and were fortunate in finding
Colin Dawson. He expertly guided us through the listed-building planning
procedure. His plans for the building were in keeping with this
sensitive site. The walls are built with old stone, the roof covered
with weathered double-roman tiles and the specially made gable ends
match those on the house.

Putting plans into effect is another thing. Here we were again fortunate
to enlist the services of David Bisgrove, who has a family tradition in
high-class building work (his father restored the cemetery chapels).

It was a major problem for David to find suitable stone, collect it,
sort it and use it. The right kind of tiles of shape and colour were
also difficult to find but found they were and, not to be outdone by
Glastonbury’s new library building we had our own topping-out ceremony!
*(photo).*

It had been our major concern that the new garage should enhance this
site. From the unanimously favourable comments we have received, many
from total strangers, we believe our architect and builder have
succeeded in the brief we gave them.
