About a year ago, it was brought to the attention of the Conservation
Society’s committee that Loxley Wood was for sale to the Woodland Trust
for £56,000, and that pledges were being sought to help with the
purchase.

Loxley Wood is an ancient woodland site on the Polden Hills between
Moorlinch and Shapwick. Evidence shows that it has existed since before
1515 when a survey showed it consisting of oak, pasture and undergrowth.

<figure>
<img src="../loxleywood.png" alt="A hand-drawn map of Loxley Wood and the surrounding roads. The main entrance to the wood is at its northwest side, and a curved track runs from here to the old entrance on the south side. A footpath joins the southeast corner and runs north to a road which leads to Catcot and Edington to the northwest, and to the A39 to the southeast. Running along the south edge of the wood is the A39, with Bridgwater to the west and Street and Glastonbury to the east. Some “informal parking” and a signpost reading “Shapwick” is indicated at the west tip of the wood, where the A39 makes a T-junction with the road running along the northwest edge of the wood, which runs northeast towards Shapwick.">
<figcaption>

Loxley Wood, north of the A39 about halfway to Bridgwater, has stood for
400 years or more.

</figcaption>
</figure>

It is situated on the northern side of A39 Bridgwater road for about
half a mile east from the junction of the road off to Shapwick, about 7¼
miles from Glastonbury Market Cross. The 53-acre site contains an area
of neglected conifer planted after most of the oak woodland was felled
in 1967. Some of the ancient woodland still remains.

After much careful deliberation, the committee voted to pledge £500 from
our tree-planting funds.

Now purchased, the wood is open to the public, and will be managed by
thinning, and gradually replacing the conifer with native broadleaf
species. Natural regeneration in this wood can be difficult because deer
graze the area. There is no intention to replace the conifer in
wholesale clearance operations; it is of very little commercial value.

The Woodland Trust’s normal policy is to invite members of the local
community to attend and assist in planting saplings grown by the trust,
but it foresees no objection for others, such as ourselves, from
organizing, in cooperation with the Loxley Wood manager, planting
schedules in the cleared areas with their own trees, or generally
assisting in work in the wood.

In this venture, the townsfolk of Glastonbury can enjoy and experience
the regeneration of a wonderful woodland on their doorstep, and the
Conservation Society is happy to have contributed.
