This year the organizers of the Bath and West Show opened a new area
known as Apples and Cider. The countryside section at County Hall
invited us to a planning conference to see whether we thought we could
contribute something useful. The county council was mounting an
exhibition showing its work connected with grants for tree-planting,
especially for cider apple trees.

I suggested that our best contribution would most likely be to show
about our own “New trees for old” scheme in which we offer £10 per
standard cider-apple tree planted near, and in sight of, the Tor.

This was eagerly accepted, so, with background notes on Somerset
orchards in the 18th and 19th century by Adrian Pearse, and photographs
of last winter’s plantings in Cinnamon Lane by John Morland, we mounted
a joint exhibition with the county council in the trees area.

We showed what a local society with willing volunteers can achieve, and
we have already been asked if we will join the county council at the
Bath and West Show next year.

On your behalf I have accepted, and plan to provide a map with our
planting sites marked and photographed. This will include the places
already planned for this winter’s plantings.

Again, many thanks to the members who helped man the stall.

Tree-planting at showground
---------------------------

The Young Farmers Club of Glastonbury and Wells asked us if we would
join them in the planting of 4,000 trees on mounds along a road to be
built round a new area at the Bath and West showground, south of Shepton
Mallet.

I chose, on your behalf, a mound where the road snakes through the
planting site. It is still marked by two flags.

On two Wednesdays and two Saturdays in March, the faithful assembled and
we put in 360 trees and shrubs, each standing with their canes and
rabbit-proof perforated guards.

I asked the Environment Authority, whom we have helped over the past
four or five years with plantings along the Brue from Cow Bridge to the
Plunging, if they would help to fund this project. This they did most
generously with a donation of £300.

I went to look at our mound when up at the showground in June. It looks
great. Thank you to the members who came digging, and to the Environment
Authority for buying the trees.
