<figure>
<img src="../Baily027.jpg" alt="Some old stone industrial-looking buildings stand edge-on to the camera view, partially obscured by trees. The building on the left is lurrounded by scaffolding, and the building on the right has a tall brick chimney protruding from it, roughly doubling its height.">
<figcaption>

The Beckery Island Regeneration Trust (BIRT) hopes to bring the listed
Baily tannery buildings into community use.

</figcaption>
</figure>

When the derelict Morland and Baily factory sites at Beckery were bought
by the Regional Development Agency (RDA), the town council agreed to set
up a committee to look at how the town would like to see the site
developed. The committee, drawn from interested people in the town,
prepared a vision of how the site could cater for all the town’s
aspirations.

The main theme was that jobs had historically been the purpose of the
site and would be the overriding priority. Housing was ruled out by the
close proximity of the sewage works, and a planning inspector ruled out
any retail activity.

Early on, it was acknowledged that some of the buildings merited
retention, although most were unworthy 1950s and 60s asbestos sheds.
Moves to have the older buildings listed had already been started, and
gained new impetus.

The committee realized that we needed specialized advice. We looked to
the Prince’s Regeneration Trust, which has a track record in this field.
The advice and support from Fred Taggart of the Prince’s Trust has been
invaluable in moving the committee to set up public meetings and
eventually form the Beckery Island Regeneration Trust (BIRT).

Funds have been raised from the town, Mendip and county councils, the
SRB, the Architectural Heritage Fund and the RDA. A total of £35,000
paid for architects to carry out a feasibility study and produce a
business plan to show how the Mill House and Baily buildings might be
brought back into economic use.

The involvement with the Prince’s Regeneration Trust has raised to a
national level the importance of these buildings. Having them listed has
encouraged the RDA to spend more than £50,000 so far to ensure they do
not deteriorate further.

A conference entitled “Putting old buildings to productive new uses” was
held at the Royal Society of Medicine in London on April 25. The lead
speaker was the government minister responsible for regeneration, and we
were asked to present the Baily buildings as an example. This was done
by Esther Scott of the RDA, as owner of the buildings.

The next day I went to London for the launch of a handbook produced by
the Prince’s Regeneration Trust to help groups such as ours through the
minefield of procedures and legislation to get worthy local buildings
back into use. I met Marianne Suhr from the BBC programme *Restoration,*
who had listened the previous day to the presentation on our scheme. I
also met directors of the lottery and heritage funds: we will need to
engage with them if our feasibility plan is acceptable to the RDA.

I think it is true to say we have saved these buildings by the high
profile they have now assumed. Furthermore, the private sector has been
alerted and become interested in the “Bauhaus” and red-brick buildings
that were originally to have been demolished. The retention of these old
buildings is having an effect on the type, style and quality of new
buildings that will be built alongside, and we are pleased that the
original theme of new employment is still a top priority with the RDA.

Our consultants reported on June 1. We hope to be able to show the RDA
that we are a credible local organization able to play a part in the
regeneration at Northover with the aim of providing start-up workplaces
to nurture new businesses locally.

<aside class="ednote">

Meanwhile, [contractors are busy levelling the adjacent site of the Morland tannery](../morland-clean/).

</aside>
