The Somerset Levels as a whole, rather than just Glastonbury, will be
the focus of a bid to have the area listed as a World Heritage Site. A
main theme is “the interaction of people and nature in an evolving
wetland landscape”.

This was made clear at the first local consultation exercise organized
by the county council’s heritage service about the World Heritage Site
proposal.

The discussion seminar, for invited people from local organizations,
took place at Glastonbury Town Hall on May 24 with representatives from
organizations including the Levels and Moors Project (LAMP), a parish
and district councillor from the Southern Moors group of parishes,
Glastonbury Antiquarian Society, Glastonbury Chamber of Commerce, Wells
Civic Society and Bridgwater Antiquarian Society. Glastonbury
Conservation Society was represented by Anthony Ward and the chairman,
John Brunsdon, though present in his role as Glastonbury town
councillor.

This area, according to Tom Mayberry, the county heritage officer who
led the SCC presentation team at the seminar, “contains a range of
nationally and internationally important archaeological sites, sites of
special scientific interest and wildlife areas. It is a landscape rich
in history and local legend and contains some of the best wetland
heritage sites in the UK, along with iconic landmarks such as
Glastonbury Tor.”

County historian Richard Brunning suggested that “the wetland heritage
of the Somerset Levels and the associated heritage settlements of
Glastonbury and Wells make up a distinctive cultural landscape that
should be considered for inclusion on the Unesco register as a World
Heritage Site.” It includes more than 29,000 acres of environmentally
sensitive land.

Participants were most concerned with the purpose of a bid. “What is it
for?” said many. The answer seems to be that it is not primarily about
tourism or economic development but rather about developing a management
plan based on conservation and sustainability for the landscapes and
communities covered by the proposal.

Concern was expressed by LAMP members about how the SCC’s impending
withdrawal from funding LAMP and its village community network might
adversely affect trust and participation in a World Heritage scheme as
the Levels and moors.

At the end of the meeting there was agreement that the SCC team should
be encouraged to continue consulting with other local and national
agencies and report back in the next four to six weeks. No agreement was
sought on the exact boundaries of any bid, but it was understood that
preparations needed to be advanced to enable a local bid to become part
of the government’s forthcoming review of the tentative list of World
Heritage sites in the UK, which is to be reviewed in 2006-07 for the
first time in seven years.
