Two nationwide developers — Urban Splash and Priority Sites — have
become involved with the former tannery site on the edge of Glastonbury.
Their role was announced by the Southwest Regional Development Agency
(RDA), owner of the site, on December 13.

The two companies intend to provide 115,000 square feet of business
space on part of the 31-acre Morland-Baily site.

They have strong track records for delivering pioneering high-quality
regeneration schemes across Britain, the RDA said. Urban Splash was
responsible for success stories such as the Royal William Yard in
Plymouth, and has particular strength in the sensitive restoration of
listed buildings.

Priority Sites is a joint venture between the national regeneration
agency English Partnerships and the Royal Bank of Scotland. It
specializes in speculative development of high-quality new-build
industrial and “hybrid” workspace. It has completed a number of
successful schemes in the Southwest, totalling 200,000 square feet and
creating 550 jobs.

The local Beckery Island Trust will not as a result be involved in the
conservation of the larger buildings on the Morland-Baily site. There
might still be a role for the trust at the Northover Mill Cottage.

The RDA said at the end of November that work to clean up contaminated
land at the site is now complete. More than 10,000 cubic metres of soil
were cleaned after boreholes, trial pits and monitoring wells were dug
to identify areas polluted by a thousand years of tanning. The tests
showed considerably more areas to treat than were first envisaged.

Up to 40 workers from the contractor Edmund Nuttall Ltd have been busy
on the site since infrastructure work began in March. 35,000 tons of
crushed concrete from demolished buildings was used to build new roads
on site. Widening of the A39 and the new junction for Morlands
Enterprise Park — as the site is now called — is due to finish in
spring.
