The Order of the Knights Templar was founded in 1119–20 in the Holy Land
to protect pilgrims, crusaders and resident Christians, the Antiquarian
Society learned from Juliet Faith and Robert Williams on February 27.

In 1129 the order was approved by the Pope, to whom they owed sole
allegiance. It gained lands and privileges throughout Europe, developing
a banking system — most of the kings of Europe eventually were in their
debt. In 1291 Christian settlers were driven out of the Holy Land, and
in 1307 King Philip of France seized the Templars’ lands, followed by an
order from the Pope instructing monarchs to arrest the Templars. In 1312
the Grand Master was burnt at the stake in France and the Order was
suppressed.

In Somerset, Templar holdings were widely dispersed. The county held a
middle position in the list of Templar property. They ran their
scattered holdings from preceptories, and their income was immune from
taxes. The Knights themselves were usually of aristocratic background;
their estates were populated by tenants and servants of the Order, who
saw themselves as Templars, but were otherwise indistinguishable from
the general population.

Examples of Templar holdings in Somerset include the Temple Meads area
of Bristol — one of their earliest grants in England, which included a
hostelry, church and farm. Textile manufacture and dyeing was a feature
of this site. Templecombe, granted in 1185 and the ninth richest Templar
holding in England, possessing 400 acres, became the main preceptory in
the southwest. Little now survives, though an early photograph shows
substantial remains of their chapel. The famous panel painting is now
preserved in the parish church.

On the Mendips, Temple Down Farm was an important sheep-rearing centre,
with 1,000 sheep and 60 other beasts. Fleeces were taken to the
preceptory at Temple Newbury, near Coleford, where three water-powered
fulling mills produced white broadcloth. The oldest recorded corn mill
in England was here too. Templar estates were also established at Temple
Cloud and Cameley, where in the church of St James is preserved a wooden
carved head believed to be of Templar origin and possessing a possible
relationship to the Templecombe painting and Turin shroud.

An aura of mystery surrounded the Templars — their power and secrecy
contributed to misinterpretation of their ceremonies and their ultimate
demise. A book to be published later this year will give further
insights into the Somerset Templars.
