<figure>
<img src="../victory-booklet.jpg" alt="TODO">
<figcaption>

Debbie Fear found this booklet for sale, in good condition, for £2 at
the St Margaret’s Hospice shop in Street a few weeks ago. It seems no
one has seen a copy before, even in the council archives.

Some questions: Who was the author, who signs himself just “**S.**”? Is
there anyone, perhaps a child at the time, who remembers the
celebrations? Are there any photographs?

</figcaption>
</figure>

Sixty years on from the end of the Second World War, this souvenir
programme from 1946, when Glastonbury celebrated the first year of
peace, brings today’s generation a fresh picture of the rigours our
townsfolk experienced in their time. The writer makes a concise and
moving list of Glastonbury’s six years of blood, sweat and tears.

He signs himself only as “S.” (any theories? Harry Scott Stokes?) His
full text is reprinted in the box below.

The final pages list a programme of events, the entire weekend June
8–10, something for everybody.

The Saturday afternoon had children’s sports in the athletic field — the
usual 50-yard race for girls 7 and under, boys’ sack race, councillors’
race, all that sort of thing. A grand carnival followed, with procession
leaving Station Road at 7pm and thoroughly parading the town: Benedict
Street, High Street, Lambrook Street, Chilkwell Street, Bere Lane,
Fisher’s Hill, Magdalene Street, Northload Street, Manor House Road,
Archers Way, and back down the High Street. And then dancing in the
Market Place till midnight.

Sunday evening had a Town Hall concert by the Glastonbury Male Voice
Choir and “guest artistes”, and on Monday afternoon was a horse show,
gymkhana, pony racing and jumping in the Abbey park, and then dancing in
the Town Hall to two bands until 2am (tickets 3/6).

</aside>

<div class="boxout">

{% include article-header with
	level: 2,
	title: "Glastonbury’s war effort, 1939–45, that’s all",
	author: "S.",
%}

This is the text by “S.” in the 1946 **Victory Celebrations Souvenir
Programme** that Debbie Fear turned up in a charity shop.

1.  ### Roll of Honour

    Adams, John Merrick  10, Manor House Road  Merchant Navy.
    Brass, Albert Edward  12, Butt Close  Marines.
    Chivers, Edward  15, St. Edmunds Road  Army.
    Chivers, John  15, St. Edmunds Road  R.A.F.
    Collihole, Phillip  Market Place  Army.
    Eels, Harold Robert  3, Manor House Road  P.A.S.L.I.
    Elliot, Wilfrid Arthur  4, Bowyers Close  Army.
    Higgins, William Henry  6, The Archers Way  R.A.F.
    Linham, Stanley Ivor  28, Bowyers Close  P.A.S.L.I.

    Marsh, Stanley Arthur  21, Landmead  R.A.

    Masters, Sidney Herbert   Manor House Road  Royal Navy.

    Moulton, William  Hill Head  Army.

    Popham, Henry Charles  6, Northload Street  P.A.S.L.I.

    Rayner, George Alfred  24, Northload Street  R.A.

    Ryall, Cyril  19, Benedict Street  Oxf. & Bucks.

    Sweet, William John  3, Beckery Terrace  Devons.

    Taylor, Allan Henry  Street Road  R.A.F.

    Thyer, Percy Ernest  Bove Town  Natal Carbineers.

    Thompson, John Edward  Street Road  Army.

    Tucker, Albert Glencross  6, Summerhouse Orchard  Fusiliers.

    Webb, George H.  38, The Archers Way  Army.

</div>

**2.** In addition to those who will not return, 442 Glastonbury men and
43 Glastonbury women are on record as having served in H.M. Forces or
the Women’s Auxiliary Services and were entitled to benefit from the
Glastonbury Welcome Home Fund (£2,904 raised during the War). Of these
17 had been Prisoners of War and the Excelsior Prisoners of War Fund
divided £493 between them on their return.

**3.** Among many others who gave of their best and wore themselves out
in the war years, Glastonbury lost and will long remember:

<div class="tightlines">

Alderman J. C. MORLAND, J.P.  }

Alderman REGINALD CLARK, J.P.  }  Ex-Mayors 

Alderman JOHN ALEXANDER, J.P.  }

Mr. R. O. WINFIELD,  Borough Surveyor

Mr. A. DEWHURST,  Deputy O.C. Report Centre

</div>

Among these steadfast men John Alexander will always stand out as the
first and last Chairman of the Civil Defence Committee and the Invasion
Committee (which would have taken over from the Mayor and Corporation
lock, stock and barrel under the Military in the event of invasion) and
also Mayor for the third time during the Victory year 1944-45. He was
taken suddenly ill within a few days of handing over to his successor,
Coun. F. J. Brake, J.P., on the 9th November, 1945, and died in the
prime of his life (as Deputy Mayor) a month later.

**4.** For security reasons, little was said during the War about the
efforts of local agriculture and industry. Even today we must content
ourselves with recounting that hundreds of acres in the Borough were
brought under the plough for the first time or (as one example), 40 per
cent of the output of our largest industrial undertaking was engaged on
direct service contracts. About one half of the wool sheepskins
processed in England during the War were processed in our town.

**5.** After the Armed Forces, and for a time before many of them, the
Fire Brigade were first in the front line and they served with
distinction throughout the War, attending blitz fires at Plymouth,
Portsmouth, Southampton, Bristol, Exeter, Bath and Weston-super-Mare.

**6.** Here and elsewhere the Home Guard served without serving,
defended us without being part of the Civil Defence, and in the best
traditions of the Territorials, the Volunteers, the Militia and the
trained bands of earlier days did their exercises and gave up endless
days and nights to qualify themselves to die in the last ditch if it had
to come to that, and so they would have. Over 450 officers and men
passed through the Glastonbury platoon (or company) of whom 150 went on
to the regular Forces. There were no casualties. The A.T.C., Army
Cadets, and Sea Cadets were para-military formations in which lads
learnt much before enlisting. The G.T.C. were a comparable organisation
for girls, but not trained for warlike operations.

**7.** The Wardens were mostly 1914–18 ex-Service men, who volunteered
at the outbreak of War for any duty that was needed, and continued
faithful in the same unto the end.

**8.** The Special Constabulary were and are a permanent addition to the
Police Force, recruited in far greater numbers during the war and
serving long spells of duty week by week throughout the War under their
own officers. In the same class, i.e. a peace-time organisation, greatly
developed, were the Red Cross, with their constant aid to Butleigh
Hospital; and St. John Ambulance, which “ambled” early and often. More
than 1,000 cases were removed and nearly 43,000 miles were covered.

**9.** The Royal Observer Corps were among the first bodies to be
mobilised, and they manned their post at Wearyall Hill day and night to
July, 1945.

**10.** The Report Centre, the First Aid and Rescue Parties and the
Information Bureau all made a valuable contribution to the war effort.

**11.** The Fire Watchers came late into the field and (under compulsory
powers) in very great numbers! They soon became an organised and well
trained force promptly available to deal with all except major fires.

**12.** Last, but not least, the W.V.S. throughout the War were ever at
the call of Mayors and others who had anything in hand for the good of
the town (or for the evacuees), and wanted help. How many meals they
served, how many dances they refreshed, and where they found all the
food and drink that they supplied (largely from their personal rations)
no-one will ever know, and nobody, whether they know or not, should ever
forget. The many other duties of the W.V.S. included staffing the Report
Centre during the day time and the supply of knitted comforts to the
forces, and the V.C.P. (Voluntary Car Pool).

**13.** The Women’s Section of the British Legion performed a similar
service for British and American soldiers, white or black, stationed in
the town or passing through here, night after night from Dunkirk to
D-Day and after, in the Supper-Bar up over the Legion.

**14.** The following was the town’s record of War Savings and Special
efforts through the War:

<div class="tightlines">

1941 War Weapons Week  69,494

1942 Warships Week  43,312

1943 Wings for Victory Week  44,113

1944 Salute the Soldier Week  64,332

1945 Thanksgiving Week  27,651

Total  £ 248,902

</div>

The total amount, large and small, special efforts and savings week by
week, from mid-1941 to the end of 1945 was £857,559.

**15.** One other service remains to be recorded. On a memorable evening
at the end of the summer of 1939, before hostilities actually commenced,
there arrived at the Town Hall, accompanied by their teachers, hundreds
and hundreds of travel-stained and weary children from Poplar and other
poor parts of London and the suburbs, children who for the most part
were to spend most of the war here, whom together with their elders we
were to get to know as “evacuees”. No one who was present will ever
forget the lump in the throat with which we welcomed them, and the
sudden realization that this was what war meant. Since that day
organised parties of mothers and children have come from Hastings and
London, and a large party of children from Bristol. At one time there
were more than a thousand evacuees altogether, and Glastonbury
householders provided homes for them all. Their contribution is one that
will be remembered with some pride.

**16.** Seven explosive bombs and several hundred incendiaries fell
(technically) within the Borough during the raids on Bristol. No one was
injured. No damage was done to property. The Siren sounded 392 times.

That’s all.    **S.**

</div>
