<figure>
<img src="../towncrest.jpg" alt="A depiction of a crest. A red Byzantine cross outlined in black is at each of the left, top, and right edges. In the centre is a blue shield, decorated with a gold and red mitre, behind which are two crossed gold crosiers. Two ribbons stream from the bottom of the mitre. Below the shield is a banner reading “floreat ecclesia anglicana”.">
</figure>

2005 is the tercentenary of Queen Anne granting a town charter to
Glastonbury. The programme of talks is advertised, notably Dr Robert
Dunning on **Wednesday March 30**, 7:30pm at the Town Hall, on the
charter, entitled “Why a Mayor for Glastonbury?” Dr Dunning is the
county historian and an Abbey trustee. The event, meant to be both
illuminating and light-hearted, is hosted by the Conservation Society —
so it’s not to be missed!

There are also a number of other major events to celebrate the
tercentenary — please support them.

Morlands
--------

Construction of the road infrastructure on the site — now
known as Morlands Enterprise Park — starts “soon”, as well as the
restoration of the Beckery houses. Removal of asbestos from inside the
redbrick and Bailys buildings started in January, and the demolition of
a large round water tank and the white-spirit tank on land owned by
Mendip council. Interesting uses for the site are being mooted — the
Regional Development Agency’s “priority sectors” are aerospace,
environmental technology, ICT and creative industries. The idea of a
combined heat and power plant (CHP) and recycling is progressing, after
favourable response at a public exhibition in November.

Meanwhile, our local Beckery Island Partnership is ready to take on the
old Beckery buildings.

New housing
-----------

Building should start soon on the land between Wells
Road and Old Wells Road after a protracted planning battle. The nearby
hospital nears completion. Opposite, between Wells Road and the relief
road, a further 200 houses have gained outline permission.

This could be seen as a new vision for Glastonbury, where housing is
concentrated to the east, away from the sewage works, while industry is
encouraged to the west, thus releasing more housing land, which is in
short supply. We are the most constrained mid-Somerset town for housing
land, and must make the best of what we have. So much of our higher land
is of such landscape value that it must never be built upon.

Already so much urban infilling has taken place as to cause social
problems, notably on-street car-parking and loss of play space for
children. The architectural standard of recent developments has
improved. Some dereliction of existing buildings in Benedict Street and
High Street continues, which is unnecessary.
