<figure>
<img src="../luckesBWm.jpg" alt="A black-and-white photograph of an old woman. She has curly grey hair and smiles at the camera.">
<figcaption>

Maurene Luckes

</figcaption>
</figure>

It is with sadness I record the death of Maurene Luckes, who lived with
painful arthritis throughout her life. She died on January 7 aged 80.

I first met Maurene back in 1952. She lived with her father Alan James
at Hillview in Street Road, and at that time the veterinary practice was
run from Highfield, the Fletchers’ house nearby; the surgery was near
the Fishers Hill junction in the building recently demolished.

I would see Maurene regularly walk her liver-coloured labrador onto
nearby Wearyall Hill, owned by the family. Algie and Norman James were
directors of John Snow & Co, whose timber yard was then in its heyday.
Maurene worked some time in in the firm’s office and also in the tax
office at Wells. She had a wide circle of friends.

Our paths crossed less often when the veterinary practice moved from
Street Road and each of us got married. Then when our Conservation
Society started tree-planting seriously we looked to Wearyall Hill as a
worthy site. First Geoff Brunt planted a few oaks along Street Road, and
St Dunstan’s pupils some specimen trees along the boundary with Bushy
Coombe Gardens. Ian Rands took over the tree-planting and with the aid
of a bequest first restored the deteriorating copse and then extended
it. After this a line of oaks was completed along Street Road.

None of this would have been possible without the permission of the
James family who own the hill. When Algie died some 20 years ago Maurene
inherited his half-share; Norman left his half to his four sons. About
18 months ago Maurene gave her half-share to the four sons. She always
took a great interest in this planting and was keen to see its success,
no doubt remembering the pleasure she had enjoyed when walking the dog
in younger days.

Maurene married Leslie Luckes in 1966 and lived in increasing retirement
at Chalice Hill Close. Her oak trees live on as a memorial to her.

- Maurene appears in a [1989 photo](/newsletter/articles/100/trees/) of the Conservation
  Society receiving an award for fencing the Wearyall copse and planting
  450 forest trees.

- Leslie Henry Luckes died peacefully at home in Chalice Hill Close on
  April 23 in 2015, aged 91.
