<aside class="boxout ednote">

John first wrote this in 1997 at his 45-year mark, and then added a
decade for a talk to Glastonbury Antiquarian Society in January 2007.

- 2007-05-07: first put online.
- 2014-01-10: small corrections, mostly typographical.
- 2018-07-20: editor added crossheads to break up text.

</aside>

<figure>
<img src="../../101/brunsdonMBE.jpg" alt="A man with short white hair and thick-rimmed glasses smiles at the camera. He wears a black jacket over a white collared shirt and patterned tie. He holds a medallion held in a presentation box.">
<figcaption>

[John Brunsdon was awarded an MBE](/newsletter/articles/101/brunsdonMBE/) in 2001.

</figcaption>
</figure>

I well remember my first sighting of Glastonbury Tor in 1952. I had
travelled on a pre-war motorcycle across Salisbury Plain, passing
Stonehenge, to take up my first job as veterinary assistant to Brian
Fletcher. He had found me lodgings with a kindly couple, Mr and Mrs
Botter at Home Cot, now White Cottage, Bere Lane. Mr Botter regaled me
with tales of the Glastonbury Festival under Rutland Boughton, in whose
orchestra he had played the violin. His son Eric worked at carpentry and
upholstery from the home; today he continues at his workshop at
Fairfield.

Working farms within the town
-----------------------------

Tuesday nights were sleepless with bereaved cows at Abbey Farm bellowing
for their calves sold at market earlier in the day. Bob Mapstone milked
shorthorns, and following a veterinary visit I would clean up in the
stone sink, which is still positioned outside the museum’s kitchen door.
When Bob Mapstone died, Mrs Mapstone generously donated the ancient barn
to the Somerset County Council for a Rural Life Museum. The farmhouse
was purchased along with additional land, at the insistence of the town
council, for the carpark.

There were still other working farms in the town. Reg Mapstone farmed at
Northload Hall Farm, where cheese was made (in the 1990s the house
became offices for Social Services). Doc Morse farmed Manor Farm, and
his sons continued until the construction of the relief road. George
Bolton dealt in cattle at Northload Bridge Farm, though he did have a
rest in jail with others for tarring and feathering poor hermit Bisgrove
at Sharpham. Farming at Sharpham was quite primitive. Cows were
hand-milked in fields and churns transported by horse and cart. Mrs
Jones would drive her horse into town with the cart loaded with peat for
fuel. Peat was to transform the prosperity of those who owned the right
land and got permission to dig. First the Eclipse Peat Co., then Fisons,
gained peat in a big way. Now the former peat fields are returning to
wetland again.

Grand houses with sad ends
--------------------------

Rutland Boughton in his day lived in The Elms, Bove Town, where he
entertained the likes of George Bernard Shaw and Edgar Wallace to appear
at the Assembly Rooms. By 1952 The Elms was known as Mount Avalon and
run by Miss Lacey as a nursing home, the only one in Glastonbury. Miss
Lacey retired and the British Israelite Trust took the house over as a
conference centre. They sold to Charles Perry, who left the place
available to squatters. There was a tremendous fire. The place was
gutted, derelict and dangerous and, after some delay, demolished. Other
unsatisfactory Perry enterprises included a failed shopping arcade
behind the Crown Hotel and the conversion of the police houses in
Benedict Street and of St George’s Hall in the High Street.

‘The right kind of people’
--------------------------

Shortly after my arrival in 1952 I was called to St Edmund’s Lodge to
attend a cat. The owner, Mrs Bath, a former mayor, kindly suggested that
I should join the Constitutional Club so as to meet the right sort of
people. This rather put me off, and I did not join for several years.
Jack Leney lived at St Edmund House. He had built most of Ashwell Lane
just before the war. Jack Leney, Ted Richards (my future father-in-law)
and Clifford Ayles were pillars of Lambrook Street Methodist Church,
which had a sizeable congregation and a full Sunday school.

Mrs McLean, Lady of the Manor of the Glaston Twelve Hides, was still at
Chalice Hill House, where she lived to be 100. George Harland inherited
the title, which is now vested with Barbara Harland. Jack Smith bought
the McLean estate. He widened Dod Lane so as to build houses in the
kitchen garden at the top and where all the daffodils used to grow
alongside Chilkwell Street. Humphrey Morland wanted the Bushy Combe
Gardens road to extend down to Dod Lane, to give rear access and relieve
Bove Town, but he was not supported. So Dod Lane remains quiet and
problems remain in Bove Town.

Captain Ashley lived at The Lodge, Coursing Batch. His off-the-lead
greyhound preceded him into town. Captain Ashley hailed a lady walking
up the hill. As he passed he exchanged pleasantries across the road, but
observing the dog now well ahead, called out, “Come here, you bitch” —
all in the same breath!

The ancient baker of Bove Town
------------------------------

One day I met Mr Wadman the baker in his bowler hat labouring up Bove
Town with his hand cart. I offered to push it for him and he accepted. I
quote from the *Central Somerset Gazette*, 1955. “This is what Mr
William James Wadman does three days a week and he will be 88 in
October. Eighty-seven years old and pushing that hand cart up the steep
height of Bove Town is this tiny man whose eyes barely reach the top of
his cart.”

The Porch family
----------------

Miss Porch lived at Southfield, Bere Lane. I got on with her large
Pyrenean Mountain dog quite well, but the Revd Noel McKittrick, vicar of
St Benedict’s, did not! It chased him across the lawn and out of the
grounds with his cassock flowing behind him like Batman. The Revd
McKittrick was an ordained minister of the Church of lreland, which
delighted my mother visiting one Christmas, as my grandfather was an
Irish minister also. Unfortunately the Revd McKittrick’s anti-war
fervour was a bit too adamant in one Remembrance Day sermon and several
career officers walked out. The Porch family were private bankers in
Glastonbury in the 19th century. Miss Porch told me how there was a run
on the bank when she was a young girl, and she accompanied her father in
a pony and trap to fetch gold sovereigns from Bridgwater, as the locally
issued banknotes were not being accepted.

Mr Montague Porch lived at Abbey Grange, Magdalene Street, in a
guesthouse run by Mr and Mrs Phillips. He had married Lord Randolph
Churchill’s widow, who predeceased him. His Italian manservant was
interned at the start of the war. Mr Porch contacted Winston Churchill
to secure his man’s release on his personal guarantee of loyalty.
Winston complied but, as he had no great liking for his stepfather,
added that he did not expect to hear from him again for the rest of the
war. Winston’s granddaughter Arabella later settled in the town and runs
the Children’s World charity and festivals in the Abbey Park.

A procession of vicars
----------------------

Hugh Knapman was vicar of St John’s in the 1950s, and our children
played together. He was a most kindly person. Peter Haynes followed,
with a model railway in the vicarage garden, and left to become
Archdeacon of Wells and then Dean of Hereford. The next vicar was Alan
Clarkson, who became Assistant Dean of Winchester. St John’s and St
Benedict’s were joined as a single benefice when the Revd McKittrick
left, and Patrick Riley came as vicar in 1984, retiring to Shaftesbury
after 20 years. Now we have Maxine Marsh, Glastonbury’s first woman
vicar.

The Victorian railings around St John’s Church were removed during the
war (Somerton’s survived). The open-plan churchyard was largely
respected, and the newly formed Friends of St John’s provided bench
seats for visitors. Progressive antisocial behaviour led to the
restoration of the railings in 1994. The stone path to the church was
old and broken. With money short, the stone was removed by Snows and
finished up in Norman James’s Devon garden. The Friends provided an
asphalt path amid great controversy. Eventually this was replaced by the
present stone path under an enhancement scheme sponsored by Manpower
Services. In the 1970s the pinnacles started falling off the tower and
Church Path was temporarily closed. The bells fell silent for fear of
further damage, and it was many years before the tower was restored and
later the bells rehung. The heavy tenor bell went to Australia.

During my second mayoral year Alan Clarkson asked me to welcome pilgrims
at a Festival of Light at an evening service in the Abbey. Monks of
Downside attended; the pilgrims consisted of disabled children with
parents and friends. It was a memorable occasion finishing with a
candlelight procession led by St John’s great Easter candle back through
the town to St Dunstan’s School, where the pilgrims were lodged.

An old cup for the road run
---------------------------

I also received for the town a gift of the Tor Trophy silver cup from
George Webb. He had won the cup outright in the 1930s, in the
distance-running race organized by Clarks sports. It is now competed for
every May in the Glastonbury Road Run round the Tor via Wick. This has
grown into a major Glastonbury event, the organization of which owes
much to Hugh Sharp and Janice White.

Veterinary adventures
---------------------

The veterinary practice first operated from what is now \[1997\] David
Hall’s art studio on Street Road. Then the practice moved to 42
Magdalene Street, where there were no dog kennels. A small terrier
escaped my charge and ran towards the Market Cross. Fit from playing
rugby I gave chase; it turned left by the café, down through workshops
behind, emerging by St Benedict’s Church, and continuing down the
street. My heart pounded as it dawned on me that it was running home to
Street. Suddenly it entered the police yard (now Abbot’s Court) and I
followed. To my dismay there were lines of police cars with the Chief
Constable inspecting. The dog ran through the ranks, I ran round and
with good fortune made an arrest with the help of a sergeant. My
reputation had been at great risk. You don’t lose animals entrusted to
your care. The practice built new premises at Orchard Terrace opposite
the cattle market, serving farmers and pet owners in a convenient
central site for many years. With the closure of the market along with
other small markets, my successors in the practice opened a new
veterinary hospital at Wirral Park.

The demise of the market was a sad day for the town. Over the years the
market day brought business into the town from the surrounding
countryside, which no longer happens. A splendid Fatstock Show and
Dinner were held by the auctioneers, Cooper and Tanner, each Christmas.
Disaster struck in the 1960s when an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease
affected the bovine herd of the Snell brothers at Common Moor. They lost
all their stock, but the disease was contained.

Tor Fair was still a big event for the community, especially the first
day, when sheep were driven by foot from Kennard Moor and sold from pens
alongside Street Road. A few horses were sold as well. Over the years
Tor Fair became a less traditional fair and more of a funfair, finally
moving to Dyehouse Lane and losing much importance in consequence. The
move was precipitated by the decision to build the Safeway supermarket
(which became Morrison’s in 2005); the small circus field was lost as
well as the convent field where the Roman Catholics had a shrine on
Pilgrimage Day. The convent and attendant school had already closed in
Magdalene Street.

Football at the Abbey Park
--------------------------

Much of the Abbey grounds was given over to the football club, which
eventually moved to the Godney Road site. There was a grandstand and the
crowd generated a lot of noise on Saturday afternoons. The rest of the
present picnic area and new pond area was grazed by cattle. They would
be driven on foot to and from Wick to eat the grass, usually early on a
Sunday morning to avoid the traffic. I once had to operate on a cow’s
abdomen in the Abbey grounds.

But I must say more about the setting up of the Rural Life Museum. The
county council started to restore the roof of the medieval barn, which
had small replacement clay tiles since the 19th century, using a
concrete imitation of stone tiles. When it was pointed out that planning
permission had not been obtained, all work stopped and the place stayed
surrounded by scaffolding and corrugated iron for months. This prompted
the Vicar of St John’s, Alan Clarkson, to comment at the mayor’s civic
service that the barn was symbolic of the ills of Glastonbury: “a town
at war with its tin hat on”. There was a great controversy raging about
a proposed relief road at the time — but more of that later. Martyn
Brown was appointed the first keeper of the Rural Life Museum. He was a
dynamic personality who did much to promote the town.

Doctors before the NHS
----------------------

The medical practitioners at first had surgeries at their private
houses. Doctor Willcox had retired to the Channel Islands. By all
accounts, when still in practice he would spend his recreational
half-days enjoying a tea-dance at Weston-super-Mare. He was successful
on the stock exchange. When he died he left the town a splendid legacy
in the form of the Willcox Trust homes for less well-off Glastonians.
His house sale, at what became for many years Ayles’ furniture shop near
the top of the High Street, revealed some fascinating early X-ray
equipment. “Dick” Ainsworth lived at Chalice Leaze in Chilkwell Street
(with the veranda). He was a keen rifle marksman in his day, as well as
being a competent surgeon, operating at Butleigh Hospital.

Dr Pinnegar was a dapper little man with a weak eye. He started practice
with a motorbike and finished driving a large Humber motorcar. He lived
at The Hollies, Bove Town, where he slipped and broke his hip on the
lias flagstones. He completed his surgery consultations first and then
called for an ambulance! My wife Jean had the misfortune to fall
downstairs when expecting our first son, Paul. Dr Pinnegar responded
quickly to our urgent call for a visit. When asked if the baby would be
all right he replied, “Ever since the world began young women in trouble
have tried falling downstairs to no effect, so the likelihood is that
the baby will be all right.” We were most reassured.

Dr Malin Boyd was a remarkable and talented man. He was a most caring
practitioner, reserving Saturday afternoons for leisurely visits to
chronically sick patients. These visits proved useful primary sources of
information for his antiquarian studies. He wrote a number of learned
papers, now lodged with the Antiquarian Society library, anxd was the
founding chairman of Glastonbury Conservation Society. He became so
concerned at the loss of many old buildings of character in the town
that he felt compelled to act when it was proposed to demolish the Crown
Hotel as well. Many shared his concern and rallied round to launch
Glastonbury Conservation Society. Harry Scott Stokes became president,
Pen Evans secretary, Jack Hepworth treasurer, and the town councillor,
former mayor and practising solicitor Cecil Hamilton-Miller joined to
make a formidable committee. Noteworthy achievements of the society
include the restoration of Summerhouse Orchard terrace through a housing
association and extensive tree-planting schemes, later under the
direction of Ian Rands. Dr Malin Boyd’s house and surgery were in the
High Street at what is now Beckett’s Inn. He was a heavy smoker and died
from cancer. His boxer dog was a constant travelling companion in his
car and predeceased him with the same complaint.

The creation of a Health Centre effectively closed the separate doctors’
surgeries. The old Glastonbury Arms pub at the top of the High Street
was demolished and the site left untidy for some time. Colonel Gould
organized a team of children to pick up litter, and rewarded them with
Mars bars. The Brunsdon children were at the front of the queue! The new
Health Centre was expectedly controversial in design but nevertheless
won a Civic Trust award particularly praising the sympathetic roof line.
A new generation of doctors followed, Bill and Susan Openshaw, Hugh
Sharp and Peter Nicholson-Lailey, Philip Jackson, etc. This led to the
need for an additional surgery, which is off Feversham Way. Built in a
neo-Palladian style, it did not get an award.

Town had a proud history
------------------------

Back in the 1950s the town was proudly partisan and insular. It was a
historic town with a Royal Charter and Borough status, while Street was
considered an overgrown village. Street was indeed growing fast, soon to
overtake Glastonbury in population and amenities under a paternal
employer provider. The borough council was almost a unitary authority in
itself with responsibilities for some roads, sewage works, refuse
collection and disposal, street cleaning, public health, council houses
etc.

Stan King was borough surveyor and George Harland was town clerk. It was
said that between them they ran the town and the council was just an
appendage. Essential works were well done and money largely well spent —
largely because the direct labour force under Stan King would tackle
every job that needed to be done as and when, with no time wasted. Stan
King, however, was not above bending the regulations or simply not doing
something he thought unnecessary. On the other hand he would do jobs,
such as cutting back overgrown hedges, that were not strictly council
responsibilities. It became known as “King’s Law” and he proceeded much
as the Abbots of Glastonbury had done before him — as he liked.

Borough surveyor meets his match in the Conservation Society
------------------------------------------------------------

Stan King did not care for old buildings. He saw the need to modernize
the town, and much was lost in consequence in Northload Street, Grope
Lane, Hill Head and elsewhere. To be fair, it was happening all over the
country in the 1960s in the name of comprehensive redevelopment — a
concept learnt from whole areas of wartime bomb damage enabling a total
replan. No attempt was made to save the isolated building of merit.
There were even councillors like Humphrey Morland to back him up,
stating that “Nothing really mattered to save except the Abbey and the
George and Pilgrim.”

To the newly formed Conservation Society this was an anathema. Neill
Bonham, the new chairman, led a team who systematically recorded the old
buildings at risk, requesting the Department of the Environment to
spot-list them. This put the brake on demolition and was followed by a
full-scale revision of the official list of protected buildings. Most of
the High Street finished up Grade II listed. Confrontation with the
borough council was inevitable. Already threatened with local-government
reorganization, this was just too much to bear. The society was
castigated as an unelected body hindering the modernization of the town.
At about this time the county council was trying to introduce a
conservation area and presented the case to a meeting of the town
council. The idea fell on deaf ears. They had heard too much about
conservation already. Cllr Edith Rice referred to “these brash young men
from the County who have come to tell us what to do with our town”.
Russell Lillford and Derek Seaward, older and wiser no doubt, had the
task recently of introducing the latest town-centre enhancement
proposals following the completion of the western relief road.

A better relationship between the council and the Conservation Society
came about as a result of planting trees in St John’s carpark. At least
we could agree about something, but we had to wait until the advent of
the Mendip District Council before the modified Conservation Area, no
longer to include Northload Street, was implemented. In a few years it
was to be redesignated an Outstanding Conservation Area and later again
enlarged. What a tragedy that so much had already gone, no longer able
to be protected.

The axe fell in 1973. We lost our borough council; our town council was
reduced to Parish status. Real power now rested with the new Mendip
District and the county council. The direct labour force went and in so
many ways standards of council care fell. In one way things were
substantially better. We were consulted as a society over all matters
involving plans relating to listed buildings. There was now a
presumption to protect these buildings and not to allow their
indiscriminate destruction.

Roads were quiet in the 1950s
-----------------------------

Road traffic back in the 1950s was still relatively light. Mrs Jones
would continue to drive her pony and cartload of peat in from Sharpham,
soon to argue with the policeman about entering the High Street from
Archer’s Way, now prohibited. Things were changing rapidly. Traffic
flows increased, especially in the summer with as yet no motorway.
Special constables stood all day Saturday at the Street Road junction
directing traffic. (Miniroundabouts were yet to come.) Soon traffic
flowed all night at weekends. Tor Rugby Club served all-night teas to
raise funds. In a desperate bid to keep traffic moving in the High
Street, a one-way system around the Abbey perimeter was introduced. It
worked well in that the traffic moved, but too fast without any calming
measures. The second six-month trial was cut short by the traffic
minister, Ernest Marples. A public enquiry followed, resulting in a
recommendation to continue two-way traffic but to provide off-street
carparks. Hence St John’s carpark and Butts Close carparks were created;
welcoming signs outside the town advertised free parking for 600 cars!

Plan for an inner relief road sparks protest
--------------------------------------------

Still the buildup of High Street traffic continued, and the county
council decided to introduce an inner relief road. It was proposed to
run from Wells Road via St Edmund’s Road, George Street, demolishing the
police campus in Benedict Street, crossing Fairfield (now Safeway) to
Street Road. Rear access for the High Street was to involve the
extension of Silver Street, demolishing the then unused Assembly Rooms
to emerge in the Market Place. This would permit pedestrianization from
the Market Cross to Archer’s Way. Plans were advanced; Councillor Frank
Chislett as the borough council’s planning chairman had the job of
promoting the idea.

Then the opposition started. Councillor Alan Tucker sitting in the
council chamber looking at the aerial photo of Glastonbury saw the now
unused line of the old railway — this must be a better route. Many
others agreed. The Inner Relief Road Protest Movement was born. Philip
Lucas (former head of St Dunstan’s School) became president. “Steve”
Jackson-Stevens won the county seat from Norman James. Susan Openshaw
lost her seat on the borough council following her mayoral year. John
Frith, a hardworking and invaluable asset to the council, was not
re-elected and never became mayor as expected. Electoral turmoil
followed. All four seats to the new Mendip District Council were won by
road protest candidates, as were most of the seats on the town council.

The reaction from the county council was very negative. If Glastonbury
did not want its relief road, other towns did — they simply moved their
resources elsewhere. Then followed a period of planning blight that was
Glastonbury’s loss and Street’s gain. Boots, Currys and Abbey Garage
were among a number of firms that relocated to Street. Increasingly
Glastonbury residents could be seen shopping in Street’s “golden mile”
of high street. It was only when Mendip’s director of planning, Raymond
Bush, came down on the side of the protesters, stating that the county
scheme was too traumatic for a small town like Glastonbury, that the
tide of official opinion turned. Nevertheless another 20 years passed
before Glastonbury achieved its preferred relief road route, and we
shall never know if the very damaging delay was really worth it.

Other road schemes were lost as well. The borough council wished to
improve Coursing Batch by reducing the bottom bend. To this end the
Chalice Well Trust was encouraged with its scheme to demolish the Tor
School buildings, built as a seminary at the bottom of Wellhouse Lane.
The works caused disruption to traffic on the A361, so Stan King ordered
in the “ball-and-chain cowboys” to hurry things up. Accidentally or
otherwise the charming Regency house was badly hit about. A big protest
followed, but by the time a public enquiry had been held the inspector
regretfully agreed that the structure was unstable and should come down.
Then came local-government reorganization and the Coursing Batch
modification never happened, but the view towards the Tor improved and
the Chalice Well gardens were extended.

Then the southern distributor (Bretenoux Road) was constructed as a
“planning gain” by the developers of the Actis estate. The plan was for
it to emerge at Edgarley by the school entrance. Mendip Council,
however, would not sanction more houses on the lower slopes of the Tor.
The county would not fund the completion of the road, so the whole
concept failed.

Back again to the town council. The road protest movement had such a
grip on local opinion that party politics were “suspended” and there was
little chance of election unless supported by the movement. Longstanding
councillors resigned in disenchantment. Non-protest candidates were
loath to stand. Two vacancies occurred, and I was asked to stand for
cooption by Edith Rice, who spoke for councillors to consider the
greater good of the town. One of the protest councillors broke ranks and
I was coopted instead of the protest candidate — to general amazement.
At my first council meeting I was reminded not to lecture them about
“good taste” — perhaps there were some bad consciences.

Footpaths are more peaceful
---------------------------

As I never expected to survive the next election I decided to try and
revitalize the local system of country footpaths. Neill Bonham had
already been out with groups of members and discovered that with wartime
neglect, and the barbed-wire separation of cattle under the Attested
Herd scheme, many paths were unwalkable. Holywell Lane was blocked with
saplings. Nevertheless, the new Countryside Act had made it clear that
the definitive footpath system was to become an amenity network. My
efforts were supported by Glastonian Councillors Edith Rice and Maurice
Bush, who knew the pathways from childhood. The town council voted some
money to part-fund the new oak signposts; Barry Hudson and I, using a
post-drilling tractor, erected some 30 signposts in a day. All went well
until the last post, when we dug up a telephone cable at Lowerside Lane!
A guidebook followed (it’s still in print and on sale) and later two
stile-building schemes by a Manpower Services team. I was returned at
the next election — top of the poll. Glastonbury warms to someone who
actually does something instead of just talking about it.

The loss of the railway under the Dr Beeching plan of rationalization
was another blow to the town. Hitherto travel had been possible
extensively from Glastonbury by train. Now those who do not own cars are
restricted to a much reduced coach service. The old railway canopy was
resited in St John’s carpark in a Manpower Services scheme sponsored by
the Conservation Society. The idea had come from Martin Godfrey, the
architect who founded Gothic Image in 1975, and won a national Pride of
Place award.

Changing patterns of employment
-------------------------------

Back in the 1950s Glastonbury enjoyed high employment. The prosperity of
Morland’s reflected in the feelgood factor of the town shops. Baily’s,
Snow’s, Draper’s and Imco (soon to move from Northload Street) all
provided employment prospects quite apart from nearby Clark’s at Street.
There were a few tramps passing through, along with gypsies that camped
usually in the lanes, but apart from peasant farmers at Sharpham there
was little evidence of poverty, let alone homelessness. Having said
that, wages were low. The town had always attracted odd sects. Druids
still climbed the Tor on May Day proclaiming peace. The Essenes did
their midnight watch as well. Local residents could visit the Abbey
free, and the Chalice Well gardens were open to all comers.

Flower power arrives
--------------------

All this changed in the 1960s when flower power hit Glastonbury. Hippies
arrived in large numbers. Lord Harlech’s son arrived in a horse and trap
smoking cannabis and was duly fined. Others took over the Chalice Well
gardens and let their goats eat the flowers. These were colourful
people. Minihaha parked her caravan in Silver Street carpark and hung
out her washing. The children put paper in car petrol tanks. Soon they
had the place to themselves. When forced to move, she encamped at the
top of Bushey Coombe provoking the volatile farmer, Bernard Slocombe, to
near apoplexy. Every available caravan parking space was being used,
which caused Stan King to dump clean sludge from the sewage-works filter
on the verges to try to prevent them parking. The unused Assembly Rooms
were taken over by a mass squat. Pat Leyshon owned the old Edward’s
butcher shop (now Red Cross) and decorated it with stylized flowers — it
became a famous landmark, the first thing visitors saw as they turned at
the top of the High Street.

Eventually the people drifted away, but some stayed on, starting
businesses and taking jobs. They formed the basis of the alternative
society we have in the town today. When in later years recession hit and
factories closed, and firms moved to Street, shops stood vacant in the
town, and the only people prepared to take them on were
tourist-orientated alternatives. Without them the town could well have
been boarded up. Willem and Helène Koppejan injected considerable
capital into Glastonbury property, notably in the creation of the
Glastonbury Experience, a courtyard trading haven from the High Street
then dominated by traffic. Local traditional residents often resent this
change and the absence of their type of shops selling their everyday
requirements.

More recently “new-age travellers” have taken over where hippies left
off. They include anarchist elements that are more difficult to live
with. Caught up in this motley crowd are those who have problems of
drug, drink and mental illness and are to be pitied for it. It is
difficult to love them all when some are so dirty and behave so badly.
They come and go from the town with the weather, phase of the moon and
proximity of festivals. Their presence undoubtedly carries the risk of
deterring other tourists. Some live in vans and cars; others live rough
or in benders . Some eventually get bedsits above our shops and are with
us all the time. Low police presence makes control of the situation
difficult and has required the introduction of paid security patrols. A
major encampment took place at Green Lands Farm, Wick, causing huge
inconvenience that took a year or more to sort out. In August 1988 — on
the 8/8/88 — a mass trespass and encampment took place on the Tor,
requiring the enforcement of the Public Order Act. Wellhouse Lane is now
zoned No Parking in consequence.

The Tor
-------

The Tor is a natural landscape feature 520 feet above sea level. A more
resistant layer of harder sandstone has protected the softer layers
underneath to produce the conical shape, and alternate terraces of clay
and blue lias. Medieval cultivation has accentuated the terraces, which
may originally have been adapted by prehistoric man to form a ceremonial
“Cretan” maze. Myths and legends abound, including the abduction of
Queen Guinivere by a warlord and the involvement by King Arthur of the
Abbot to secure her release. Philip Rahtz of Birmingham University
excavated at the top in the 1960s, confirming the existence of a
dark-age settlement, which fitted nicely with this Arthurian tale. He
describes in his Glastonbury book how the monastic settlement evolved.

What we see now is the surviving tower of St Michael’s church, the
second built on this unstable site. The first was destroyed by
earthquake, and the present tower partly rebuilt after lightning struck
in the 18th century. The tower is a scheduled ancient monument protected
by statute. Virtually all the Tor fields inside the road system are now
owned by the National Trust, which has bylaws that prohibit camping,
fires, damange and the playing of musical instruments. Glastonbury Tor
comes under the Wessex Region of the National Trust, based at
Warminster. The NT employs land agents, managers, wardens and a number
of specialist persons. In the past where there existed, as at
Glastonbury, a small area of land with no house to maintain, local
management committees were formed. The late Colonel Hugh Gould chaired
such a committee for many years, assisted by George Harland, Bill Knight
and others. Humphrey Morland took over the chair and was anxious to
continue the management role. It was at this stage that I joined the
committee along with Barry Hudson. Many of the younger trees around the
edge of the property date from this time. Humphrey Morland moved away,
and I took over the chairmanship.

About this time, 1980, a local plan was in preparation by Mendip
council. Marion Meek, the first conservation officer, was very concerned
about the serious erosion problem developing on the Tor. Substantial
areas on and around the footpaths were eroded down to the bedrock, and
the foundations of the tower exposed. The National Trust agent, Jim
Thorneycroft, was already at work on the problem. A management plan was
drawn up. Eroded areas were reinstated with tons of rock, earth and
netted turf. The contractor Don Cribb did the task using an ingenious
homemade railway system. A Royal Navy helicopter airlifted a lot of
materials for us. Steps and hard paths were installed using railway
sleepers and concrete for low cost and safety.

The top of the Tor was extensively eroded. The rusty broken railings
were removed. The bricked-up east doorway was reopened and the whole
area around the tower raised by using a precast interlocking system
covered by stones and finally capped with concrete, raising the surface
some eighteen inches. The whole appearance was substantially improved,
despite the use of relatively unsympathetic materials, largely because
the previous eroded state looked so much worse!

A system of mostly sheep grazing was adopted alongside a campaign to
educate the public to control their dogs. The cost of doing this work
far exceeded the resources of the local management committee.
Reluctantly we had to agree to being an advisory committee only, so as
to secure wider NT funding. Why had all this work become necessary?
Simply because of the ever increasing number of visitors in all
weathers, wearing away the grass paths, widening the paths and in
consequence exposing the soil to wind and rain, and finally exposing the
bedrock.

This remedial work along with the grazing management and control of
weeds and rabbits has been remarkably successful in coping with the
increasing number of visiting public. Thousands of visitors have been
able to enter St Michael’s tower and enjoy the unique views through the
doorways to the Somerset Levels. Mostly, visitors have behaved very
well. Problems have arisen from an anarchist daubing paint, and new-age
travellers lighting fires at night within the tower, cracking the
recently paved floor. The playing of drums within the tower at night in
the summer is very disturbing to local residents. One threatened to take
the National Trust to court for not upholding the bylaws. Recently some
local elderly residents have run a press campaign to reinstate the
railings round the tower to better protect the monument.

The matter of how best to protect the tower is receiving attention in
the context of a new management plan under preparation by Adrian
Woodhall, the NT countryside manager. Railings by themselves may not be
the answer to the determined vandal at such a remote site. They would
require ancient-monument consent. The new management plan is likely to
include proposals to upgrade the appearance of footpaths, gateways etc.
and will require a successful bid for lottery funding. More recently
still, sheep have been withdrawn as a result of losses from
dog-worrying. The return of cows in a wet season brought a number of
complaints from visitors. Then again, even visitors were excluded from
the Tor during a widespread precaution against foot-and-mouth disease.

The Abbey, its custodians and its chairmen
------------------------------------------

The Abbey remains the town’s principal tourist attraction. Dr Ralegh
Radford excavated for many postwar years to good effect. Sadly he did
not write up his work, which remains in note form and difficult to
decipher — unlike Philip Rahtz and Nancy and Charles Hollinrake, who
have been meticulous in recording their work elsewhere. Philip Rahtz
carried out a series of digs sponsored by the Chalice Well Trust — at
the Well, the Tor, and at Beckery Chapel. The Hollinrakes have been
involved in rescue archaeology at a number of sites, notably the
medieval canal site across the old fairfield. The Abbey grounds have
evolved under successive custodians. Major Ashby saw the departure of
the football club, the restoration of the round pond, and the reclaiming
of the picnic area with its new pathways. Commander Scadding’s term saw
the new shop and visitor centre. Now Brigadier Morgan has created a new
pond and widened the public use of the grounds. Conservation work
continues all the time to keep the ruins safe to visit. Custodians act
under the directorship of a board of trustees, not all living locally.
Prebendary John Lance was succeeded as chairman by Prebendary Vere Hodge
— a passionate believer in the Arimathea story. Bernard Harvey, the
chairman in the late 1990s, gave much sound financial leadership. Then
we had Peter Speke, and since 2005 the historian Dr Robert Dunning. The
Roman Catholics now pilgrimage to the Abbey as well as the Anglicans.
Evangelical events are held. Miracle plays directed by Ken Janes for
many years have returned under Bill Wych. Sadly the peafowl did not
stay: like James Austin’s kangaroos they were a passing phenomenon. Mor
recently a series of musical Extravaganzas have been held, sponsored by
Michael Eavis.

Tourist information
-------------------

The old borough council created the advertising association — a
committee set up to promote the town and tourism. It produced a town
guide, leaflets and maps for tourists and did some modest advertising. A
big step forward came when Bill Knight allowed the free use of 7
Northload Street and then part of Marchant’s Buildings as a tourist
information office. This was a low-cost Glastonbury enterprise run by
volunteers \[and in the 1980s even had a computer display in the window
with high-tech touchpad through the glass\]. Eventually with the advent
of professional council tourism officers, a perceived need for larger
premises, and the threatened closure of the Tribunal, Glastonbury
Tribunal Ltd was formed. This now operates a networked TIC from the
Tribunal with paid and voluntary staff, under the chairmanship of Dennis
Allen. The internationally important Lake Village collection owned by
the Antiquarian Society and managed by the county museums service is
displayed upstairs in the Tribunal. The Antiquarian Society museum was
still in the Town Hall, where it had been since the 19th century until
the council required the space for the refurbished small hall. An
adequate home for a Glastonbury museum, the *raison d’être*, has yet to
be found . At the time a cinema operated in the large Town Hall; its
seats were removed for other functions. Ballroom dances were popular in
the winter.

Police HQ was here
------------------

And what about law and order? Glastonbury was the HQ of the Somerset
Constabulary in the 19th century. In the 1950s the police houses were
still occupied by police officers. “Ginger” Harris was a no-nonsense
officer and he had a cell to prove it. Although the police houses became
blighted with the road plans for the relief road (serving briefly as
homes again for Ugandan Asians escaping the despot Amin). The police
station remained open until the late 1980s. Since then we have been
policed from Street with totally inadequate resources at a time when
antisocial behaviour requires beat policing. A “cop shop” or office
facility set up in the Town Hall was never used and abandoned. The
magistrates’ court lasted a little longer but is now a youth club; the
court moved to Wells. In the days of the borough council the mayor sat
on the bench during the year of office. The town council is currently
financing security patrols to supplement an inadequate police presence.
CCTV is about to be installed.

Football and rugby
------------------

As already mentioned, the association football club moved to Godney
Road, sharing the site with the greyhound track. An undercover police
operation revealed licensing irregularities. A prosecution followed and
the town clerk, a dignified pillar of the community and former
schoolmaster, was held responsible as chairman and fined. He was not
amused at this blot on his otherwise clean record! The Tor Rugby Club
were let at peppercorn rent the field at the corner of Street Road and
Beckery New Road by Norman and Algy James. The latter raced camels in
his younger days. Club members struggled to re-erect an old EMI hut as a
clubhouse until it disintegrated in a gale. Sympathy generated by this
mishap led to Rotary Club members, including Cyril Driver, help raise
funds for a Pratton building, in which many a high-spirited evening was
passed. Tor RFC was in its heyday, winning the Bath seven-a-side
competition. The winning team included John Crocker. The family shoe
shop was opposite the Town Hall, next door to what was then W.H. Smith.
(Then, towards the Cross, were Farqueson the chemist and Dowdney the
butcher and, around the corner, Hucker the fishmonger.) Tor RFC were
persuaded by a financial offer to relocate at Lowerside Lane, the town
thus losing another greenfield site to some not very pretty commercial
development. The old Morlands recreation grounds and club remain in new
hands. In former days County Cricket matches were held on this site.
Nearby the Territorial Army would operarte from their drill hall — now
put to other uses.

Glastonbury’s youth organizations survive but not as well supported as
formerly, when the mayor’s civic parade and the Remembrance parade would
see them out in large numbers; but then again even the British Legion
parade declines in numbers, with its club in Benedict Street now closed.

Town twinning
-------------

It was Harry Scott Stokes who convinced the borough council to twin with
the French town of Bretenoux. An independent committee ran exchange
visits alternate years to each town. The problem was the long distance
and the journey involved. When St Dunstan’s School and the Rotary Club
decided on different, closer town-twinning arrangements the Bretenoux
link weakened. The twinning is now in abeyance. An official party from
the town went to Glastonbury, Connecticut, for the American namesake’s
tercentenary. Previous to this we had received financial help from
Connecticut for replacing the chiming clock in St John’s tower. The
visit overall was a success. Sadly something happened in America which
broke up our visiting town band. We must hope it recovers.

Exceptional weather
-------------------

The winter of 1963 proved exceptionally cold. Piles of cleared snow
became blocks of ice as temperatures fell, remaining sub-zero
(Fahrenheit then!) for weeks. The River Brue froze over, and I regularly
skated from Cow Bridge via the Millstream and under the main road to the
Morlands factory until melt from the factory kitchen prevented further
progress. Rain before the thaw set in covered everything with ice and
caused temporary havoc.

In 1979 heavy rain flooded out the Bath and West Show, causing the
mayor, John Bromfield, to rename the event Bath and Wet. Torrents of
rainwater off the Tor flooded down Wellhouse Lane, crossed the A361 and
passed right through the cottages opposite, cascading downhill.
Flood-prevention grids and drainage followed.

Unsightly carpark by the Abbey
------------------------------

St Dunstan’s carpark remains an environmental problem. Every writer of
consequence has criticized its unsympathetic appearence so close to the
Abbey. Once part of the early Abbey precincts, it became a garden in the
18th century, only to be a derelict eyesore in the ownership of a
developer after the First World War. Rescued by public subscription, it
became a useful car and coach park for the Town Hall and Abbey. A local
plan sought to convert the area into amenity gardens and indeed a public
enquiry endorsed this. Subsequently the architect and planner Roy
Worscott devised a concept of screening the carpark with a
pavilion-shaped library along Magdalene Street, which preserved
sightlines to the Abbey. Cost and design constraints have made this
concept unviable, so the problem remains. Criticism of the area will no
doubt continue, along with the debate surrounding the merits of a
short-term visit against the wider benefits to the town of the longer
stay and walk past shops. The carpark is now back in the ownership of
the town council.

Nearly all the town’s modern housing estates — Actis, Paradise,
Thorndun, Avalon, Wirral Park and Millstream along with other
developments off Wells Road, Roman Way, Butleigh Road, and the newly
built Leg of Mutton Road — occurred in the last 55 years. Land suitable
for building is getting scarce, being either environmentally sensitive
or undesirably low-lying.

The Freemen of Glastonbury:
---------------------------

• H. F. Scott Stokes was managing director of Morlands. Through his
scholarly studies he became hugely knowledgeable about Glastonbury. He
was mayor six times, including Festival of Britain year, when he planted
the Holy Thorn on Wearyall Hill. He was founder president of Glastonbury
Conservation Society and first Freeman of Glastonbury.

• Edith Rice was born in Benedict Street. She grew up helping her
parents run the King William Inn before spending time away assisting at
a children’s home. After training she joined the Diocesan Moral Welfare
team. She was mayor four times, zealously pro-Glastonbury and our second
Freeman.

• Stephen Morland was joint chairman of Colombian Fur Dressers and Dyers
Ltd, a subsidiary of Morlands. He was an Alderman of the county council,
on which he served some 42 years, chairing both the education and
public-health committees. Both St Dunstan’s and Crispin schools were
built under his chairmanship. His scholarly knowledge was immense, and
he was president of both Antiquarian and Conservation Societies. He was
the town’s third Freeman.

• John Bromfield taught at Millfield and coached athletics. He was twice
mayor and involved himself in numerous charitable causes. Through his
diligent researches he proved that ownership of the allotment land off
Benedict Street lay with Glastonbury town council — who sold it very
profitably for the benefit of the town. He is our fourth Freeman of
Glastonbury.

Upsets for thorn and twinning
-----------------------------

Events do not always run smoothly, however. The Holy Thorn tree planted
on Wearyall Hill in 1951 died and had to be replaced the next year. (It
is wrongly sited and rarely flowers.) The town-twinning with Bretenoux
has not blossomed either, and the Morlands proud empire has passed away,
its Northover site in dereliction.

Remarkable characters on the council
------------------------------------

Edith Rice once tied at the poll for a borough-council seat with Hugh
Barker. She conceded the seat to him since she detested gambling and
would not toss a coin. At the next byelection she was opposed by a
road-protest independent, and it looked like another defeat for her. She
won by ten votes, all of which were obtained by frantic “knocking up” by
her supporters in the last half-hour before polls closed. A forlorn
trickle of crestfallen young ladies would climb up Hill Head to seek her
help. Then again, one day she was seen in hot pursuit down Hill Head,
along with Miss Osborne Smith, of a very young Christopher Driver, who
had decided that he did not like school any longer and had run off home.

Mayor Charles Dadford was the outspoken and sometimes abrupt licensee of
the Market House. He castigated a councillor who arrived at council on a
hot evening in casual dress: “I will not have councillors turning up
looking like bums.” They should be dressed in a suit and wear a tie. The
atmosphere in the council chamber was rather tense, as well as hot.
Edith Rice rose to ask if he would like ladies to wear a hat. I could
hardly contain myself. Edith Rice was well known for her hats. When she
purchased a new Morris Minor convertible car, bright yellow, she asked
her retired police-sergeant friend what he thought of it. He replied
that if she had the roof down and was to wear her red hat, she would be
like a custard tart with a cherry on top!

Stephen Morland after 42 years on the County Council was deprived of his
County Alderman’s seat by local-government reorganization in 1973 and
the abolition of Aldermen. He failed to win a seat on the town council,
where his immense knowledge and experience would have been invaluable.  
A fire broke out on the derelict Morlands site. I asked Stephen Morland
which part had been damaged. He told me it was part of the
administrative area and included the boardroom, and added that he always
believed the best thing that could happen to that building was to set
fire to it! Stephen Morland lived a long and useful life. In retirement
he helped with meals on wheels, administering to many former employees
younger than himself, who were delighted to chat to him.

I had the privilege of being deputy mayor twice for John Bromfield
during his terms of office. He was so conscientious as mayor that I
seldom had to deputize for him. His second mayoral reception was quite
remarkable for the colourful range of guests invited. One Nigerian
Millfield parent asked Brom if he was paid for his work as mayor. Brom
replied, “No”. Then his questioner asked if he received
“considerations”. Again the answer was no. His Nigerian guest looked
puzzled and remarked, “In my country we get paid, *and* we receive
considerations!” Brom’s tragic ill health restricted a distinguished
career of public service. The closure of the British Legion Club must
have saddened as well.

I was elected to Somerset County Council in 1989. The Glastonbury
western relief road was to be constructed at the same time as the Wells
relief road. Preliminary weighing-down of the peaty land with stone soon
commenced. The MP, David Heathcoat-Amory, told me that the Department of
Transport could not fund both schemes simultaneously. One road should
wait, and they considered Wells more urgent. I argued in favour of
Glastonbury since I could now vouch for agreement on the route, whereas
the Wells route was still controversial. Both schemes had priority
funding, as they were seen to be protecting historic towns. To this end
additional funding was to be used to make the town centres more
attractive and pedestrian-friendly. It was all part of the deal. We
could not have the new road and fail to alter the traffic-dominated town
centre. The landscaped relief road was well received, but opposition
rose against altering the town centre. The Glastonbury Residents
Association put up election candidates dedicated to “wait and see”, with
preferably no change. For a while it looked like a rerun of the
road-protest movement, but while the GRA gained two Mendip seats and
took control of the town council, works on the town centre continued
with some modification due to funding difficulties. The entrance to
Northload Street became pedestrianized and the High Street was
traffic-calmed. There may yet be trials of pedestrian priority. Anything
innovative in Glastonbury tends to be controversial and county
councillors tend not to be elected for a second term in office.

So much more could be said
--------------------------

This is a personal history and inevitably there are omissions. More
could be written about the campaign to save the fire station, associated
with Jack Tucker (followed by his son Ian, also a long-serving town
councillor and now Freeman), the splendid carnivals each year that owed
so much to the energetic leadership of Maurice Bush, Hugh Barker, Ern
Holley and others; the demise of the Town Hall cinema; the moving
Remembrance parades under Ralph Linham as parade marshall; Vic Jones’s
service as standard-bearer and poppy collector; Les Sharp and Bill
Wilkins’ service as macebearers and firemen, etc. etc. To do justice to
all who have contributed to the town over the last 45 years would
require much more time.

Latterly, a Civic Trust report prepared by David Williams revealed the
town’s strengths and weaknesses and pointed ways forward. Now schemes
supported by the Rural Development Agency are under way to move commerce
and tourism forward into the new millennium. These and the initiative to
redevelop the Morlands site give every encouragement for the future.

There have been as many changes at 45 years as there had been in the
previous 40, when Wright wrote in the 1880s. But the essential
Glastonbury remains: the Tor, Wearyall and Wick Hollow are still there
for all to enjoy.

A legend at the last
--------------------

One story remains to be told. A stork appeared on Kennard Moor and was
around for several weeks. The tale was put about that it had made a
wrong delivery to Butleigh Hospital (then a maternity unit) and was too
ashamed to go back and admit it … but now I am straying into the realm
of Glastonbury myths and legends and must finish.
