<figure>
<img src="../architect-coombe.jpg" alt="A modern building situated among grass and trees.">
<figcaption>

One of the modern Hepworth houses in Wick Hollow, seen from across the
coombe.

</figcaption>
</figure>

CIAM, Docomomo, Mars — What are these organizations? Who are they for?

They’re all about architecture, and who it’s for and what it can and
should do for us. They’re all involved with the language of architecture
to achieve a physical environment enriching for us all, through such
means as recording, conservation and promotion of ideas, methods of
building construction and so on, around the world.

CIAM is the Congrès International d’Architecture Moderne. Docomomo
stands for Documentation and Conservation of Modern-Movement Buildings
and Sites. And Mars is the Modern Architecture Research group. The first
two are international organizations with active UK branches. CIAM was
founded in 1928, Docomomo in 1989.

In September I went to a 60th-anniversary celebration of CIAM’s sixth
congress, the first postwar congress, to which architects and planners
came from all over the world, to develop and record their contribution
to rebuilding it. Le Corbusier was one of them, among all the architects
well known to us then.

And where did they all converge in September 1947? At Bridgwater Arts
Centre, of course — where else? The “class photo”, 100 or so of them,
was taken in the Bristol Aeroplane Company factory — which,
appropriately, was then producing aluminium temporary housing. The arts
centre was hardly big enough for the group.

And where was our 60th-anniversary gathering? At the same arts centre,
of course!

As conservation is involved, of modern architecture yes, I thought this
might still interest our Conservation Society. We have at least two
examples of modern architecture in Glastonbury: the “Bauhaus” building
on the Morlands site, dating from the early 1930s, and the houses
designed by Jack Hepworth in the 1960s round the top of Bushy Coombe.

His impressive, and modern, warehouse building for Morlands, near the
surviving “Bauhaus” building, was unfortunately demolished in 2005.
