<figure>
<img src="../bridgw-blake.jpg" alt="Two people lean against the pedestal of a statue. The statue is of a man who points to the right of where he is looking. In the background is a large domed building.">
<figcaption>

Miles and Alex, two of the young volunteers with Bridgwater and District
Civic Society, pose by the town-centre statue of Admiral Blake.

</figcaption>
</figure>

We are all familiar with the problem of engaging young people in local
projects. However, there is a great deal of truth in the cliché “if you
don’t ask, you don’t get”. Well, we asked and we got!

Early in 2006, the Bridgwater civic society and other local
organisations were invited to participate with the Bridgwater Arts
Centre in bidding for Heritage Lottery funding. The bid won, the society
embarked upon “The Building of Bridgwater” project.

The plan involved providing and mounting blue plaques on buildings and
at sites of historic importance, updating existing interpretation boards
and commissioning new ones. Research needed to be done, drawings for the
proposed plaques prepared and much else besides. We approached
Bridgwater College and young student volunteers came forward to help,
bringing energy and genuine interest to whatever they were asked to do.

This was not a one-off project. 2007 marks the 350th anniversary of the
death of Robert Blake, “the father of the English navy”, born in
Bridgwater. He was one of Cromwell’s naval generals.   As part of this
year’s programme of events some of those same students produced two
films about Blake. On their own initiative they applied for and were
granted funding; they mastered the equipment to film at Blake-related
sites and arranged the printed publicity and all the other aspects of
putting together a project of this kind. As a result they engendered an
interest and support from fellow students and friends aged 14 to 19 and
the wider community. These films were screened by September. The
students have also been supportive of many other events in and around
the town.

The society is now publishing a book illustrating the plaques installed,
containing some of the broader historic facts unearthed when wording for
the plaques was being considered. Again Bridgwater College students are
helping us to achieve this. It has been heartening to work with young
people who have rewarded us with hard work, enthusiasm and their fresh
ideas.

You can see the work on the society’s website, bridgwatercivic.org.uk.

Ancient mill
------------

One blue plaque is in Blake Street, formerly Mill Street, on a building
that was once Bridgwater’s mill. “Situated over a main watercourse, it
has survived in different forms at this site for over 800 years at
least,” said Siobhan Wilson. “In its early days, it would have been used
to grind grain for feeding the townsfolk.

“In James II’s time it was used to pump water for the town’s piped
supply at the High Cross in Cornhill; in Victoria’s time it was a
sawmill.”

A decade ago the old mill caught fire, ruining plans to convert it to an
extension to the Blake Museum. It now languishes as a forlorn listed
building in the care of Sedgemoor council.

<footer class="ednote">

Bernice Lashbrook is secretary of Bridgwater and District Civic Society.

</footer>
