<figure>
<img src="../chair-springwater.jpg" alt="TODO">
<figcaption>

The last in the series of summer walks arranged by Ian Rands took us to
the new Glastonbury Spring Water bottling plant at Park Corner Farm, on
the southeast slope of the Tor. Ian Tucker showed us the borehole that
collects water flowing to the White Spring on the other side of the Tor,
and the eco-friendly new buildings for purifying and bottling the water.

</figcaption>
</figure>

The housemartens departed south in October from their collection point
at the Tor, a little later than usual, and already the weather was
colder.

We had an excellent afternoon at Glastonbury Spring Water’s new
[bottling depot](/newsletter/articles/115/bottle-water/) at the foot of the Tor, at Park
Corner Farm, now fully operational. Many thanks to Ian and Carol Tucker
for the look round, and to their son David, who manages the operation —
and to Jan Morland for recording the event on camera.

*Somerset Life* magazine did a Glastonbury article in which our society
gained an accolade.

Winter **meetings** have been arranged *(see the list on page 2 \[of the
printed newsletter\])*. Please attend if you can, especially the annual
general meeting on November 30. We need replacement skills: Dennis Allen
wants to step down after many years as treasurer, having given most
loyal service. We are sorry too to lose Neil Stevenson from the
committee, as he finds his new career in education demanding. New
younger committee members are particularly needed.

Congratulations to all involved in the now completed Sedgemoor Way
development. The large building — inexplicably named **The Tanneries** —
fits comfortably on what was an ugly gasworks site. Vehicles are
accommodated off the road in a landscaped carpark. This, along with
fresh tree-planting, has significantly enhanced this entrance to the
town.

The Beckery Island Regeneration Trust \[Birt\] won its bid to the RDA to
restore **Abbot Bere’s mill** at Northover for a community
not-for-profit use. We have been asked to help by clearing the small
garden surround, and possibly some landscaping. Little of the medieval
structure remains, but it is Grade II listed. In its prime, the mill’s
income supported the “poor little women” who lived in the almshouses
where the Abbey shop now stands. It will be great to see this
interesting little building restored at the town’s entrance.
