<figure>
<img src="../walk-carymoor.jpg" alt="Around 12 people wearing high-vis vests stand in a field. In the distance are rolling hills.">
<figcaption>

Carymoor: Members toured the former Dimmer dump, which has been returned
to nature. Our society helped plant some of its trees.

</figcaption>
</figure>

The weather was disappointing this summer, but on August 4 the sun shone
for our tour of Carymoor Environmental Centre. This is a working
landfill site 13 miles southeast of us near Dimmer, where completed
areas have been returned to nature and used for educational purposes. So
successful have they been that the Somerset Wildlife Trust approached
the Carymoor trust and is now working in partnership.

Our guide for the day was Julia Percy. She showed us first the trust’s
Somerset wildflower collection, planted in used tyres, all labelled and
much visited by local schoolchildren. It’s constantly being added to and
it’s hoped it will become the “county collection”.

We toured a private wetland site alongside, where Carymoor volunteers
helped plant the present reedbeds and built an artificial kingfisher
bank. A kingfisher has already been seen in the area and there are high
hopes that it and others will burrow and nest in it next year. We have
been invited to help plant further reedbeds in the autumn.

We were privileged to view three deer come down to the water to drink as
we headed on up to the now recovered landfill site.

Refuse is buried in clay-lined pits, where it will remain indefinitely.
The methane gas it gives off is tapped, and generators supply the
national grid. Any liquid residue (leachate) is filtered, aerated and
returned to the nearby river — actually cleaner than the river water.
The area of completed landfill is sown with grass and wildflower seeds
and becomes a wildlife haven.

We spotted some trees that we had planted experimentally in old tyres
some years ago. Although healthy, they have been kept in check by
grazing deer.

About 150 lorries a day empty their contents at Carymoor. The Carymoor
trust does great work, but we must all think about the amount of rubbish
we throw out. By 2020 there will be no more landfill sites available in
this country. What will we do then?

Our walk finished back at the environmental centre, which is a “green”
building powered by its own wind turbine. We ate our picnic on the
veranda of the adjacent cob house, a pleasant end to a very enjoyable
day. Thanks to Julia Percy, our tour guide, and to Alan Fear for
arranging the event.
