Geoff Brunt had agreed to lead a walk in the Great Breach Wood area of
the Poldens to show us the various species of butterflies that inhabit
the area and explain about their behaviour, requirements and
conservation. I was looking forward to this outing, but the weather had
been far from suitable for butterflies and I spent the morning of July
14 wondering whether it was going to be worth the trip. Just before
lunch the cloud began to break and a warm sun appeared. This was all
that was needed.

Nine of us met Geoff at the Fountain Forestry carpark and were given a
fascinating tour of the wood. The most delightful butterfly, in my
opinion, was the *silver-washed fritillary*: a large orange-coloured
butterfly, with black markings on the upper wings. To this is added a
silvery colouration to the lower part of the wings, from which it
derives its name.

We were able to contrast this specie with the *comma*, a smaller
butterfly but with a superficially similar wing pattern. However, side
by side the size difference was obvious, as was the scalloped effect on
the comma’s wings.

I now know the difference between the *small* and *large skippers*, tiny
butterflies that resemble Concorde when at rest and with very different
under-wing colouration.

Geoff explained the work that had been done to create the right habitats
for these various species and explained how plants had returned to the
woods after glades had been formed — plants that were required for
certain species to breed successfully and which had been lying dormant
in the ground-held seed bank, waiting for the right environment for
their regeneration. The *large blue* butterfly is now breeding in the
area.

I have mentioned only a few of the species we saw, together with the
moths and many plants. This was a fascinating and instructive walk, in
good company. If Geoff can be persuaded to repeat it at some time in the
future, I will be there again and I would thoroughly recommend it to
anyone with an interest in nature and wishing to understand more about
ecology.
