<figure>
<img src="../hepworth-nomask.jpg" alt="A man with receding white hair and aviator-style glasses looks slightly downwards with a look of concentration. He wears a chequered collared shirt.">
<figcaption>
Jack Hepworth,
1911 Aug 11 – 2003 Jan 28
</figcaption>
</figure>

Sadly we have lost another of our founder members. Jack Hepworth served
on the committee as treasurer. As a qualified architect his input was
invaluable, giving credibility to our society in its early difficult
years.

A noted modern artist, Jack earned his living as an abstract painter in
the 1930s, using the name Arthur Jackson (his Christian names); the Tate
bought one of his works in the 60s. Just before the war he trained as an
architect, and in the Royal Engineers worked on factory buildings in
Lancashire, the Sudan and Palestine. Demobbed, he finished his training
and worked under the celebrated Sir Leslie Martin, first on railway
projects and then the Royal Festival Hall. Later he worked for the
hospital board and schools in London.

After marrying in 1951, Jack had a brief period in architectural
partnership in Bath. When Morlands offered him the job of company
architect, he worked there for the rest of his career. Besides the
remarkable O Block (now being called the Hepworth Building) and others
in Glastonbury and Highbridge, he designed a big new tannery at Redruth
in the late 1960s.

Jack also designed three houses at the top of Bushy Coombe for members
of the Morland and Scott Stokes family — all the coombe once belonged to
Ynyswitrin (now Preston Manor), the home of John Colby Morland and then
of his son Humphrey Morland. The nearby house in Bulwarks Lane where the
Hepworths lived and the orchard opposite it were once, according to the
deeds, a violet farm. Jack was also a beekeeper who helped set up the
hives at the Rural Life Museum.

His wife, the former Anne Folliott Scott Stokes, daughter of our founder
president, died in 1996, and they are buried together at the Meeting
House in Street. Our sympathy goes to their children: Mary lives in
London and Jonathan in Devon. The youngest, Ben, a chartered surveyor
specializing in rural practice, lived with his father for the past few
years and hopes to keep on the family house.

<article class="boxout">

Putting the lid on it
---------------------

<aside class="ednote">

Reprinted from Morlands Magazine, spring 1961

</aside>

<figure>
<img src="../hepworth-crane.jpg" alt="Some men stand on a curved section of material suspended by a crane, at a building site. Other men guide it into position.">
</figure>

When the time came to put the roof on our new dry-process building
\[O Block\] there was tremendous local interest. Six months ago,
inhabitants of Wells and Glastonbury had watched the progress through
their towns of special lorries carrying 60-foot-long, seven-ton slabs of
pre-stressed, pre-cast concrete, and now the time had come for the slabs
to be lifted into position.

The roofing contractors hired two cranes for the job: one of 50 tons
lifting capacity — one of the biggest self-propelled cranes in the
country — was fitted with a 130-foot jib for the occasion and the other,
looking quite small in comparison, a 35-ton crawler crane. The
contractor told us that the job presented several unusual snags:
normally the cranes would work inside the building, but they were too
heavy for our floors and so they had to work outside. This meant they
were working on newly made-up ground, and particularly on the riverbank
side of the building it was feared that there might be insufficient
strength there to support them.

News of this operation had reached the BBC, which sent a television
reporter down to cover the hoisting of the first slab for the West of
England news programme. It took several hours to get everything ready
for the first lift, and both cranes had to be moved several times to
find the best position, but finally all was in order, and in a few
minutes the first of the 48 shells was on the roof in exactly the right
position. Having found the right way to do the job, it was much easier
to position the remainder of the shells, and the roof was completed on
schedule in about 10 working days.

This sort of roof is very unusual in this country, but it has many
advantages over the conventional factory roof, and we expect many other
firms will follow our example.

</article>
