<figure>
<img src="../rands-mug.jpg" alt="Photograph of a face. A senior white man looks at the camera with mouth slightly open. His hair is short, with a thin patch on top. He has a white moustache. He wears a hatched white shirt.">
<figcaption>

Ian Rands

</figcaption>
</figure>

I found a photograph the other day with the date 28 March 1985 on it. It
was the day on which our society started its serious tree-planting: 20
oaks with stakes and guards on Wick Hill, at the northern end of
Maidencroft Lane.

This was the beginning of the large planting programme, which, over the
next 12 years put more than 200 trees — oak, beech, Scots and Corsican
pines — on that hillside. They stretch in a row for more than 1½ miles:
up the hill to the old pines, down to Gog and Magog, and on down to Wick
Lane.

Shown in that 1985 photograph, digging and planting, are Ian Tucker,
Geoffrey Brunt, John and David Tucker and Toby Beaumont. Not shown, but
nevertheless working hard digging holes, humping stakes and laying out
trees, were John Brunsdon, Kevin Redpath, Barry and Vera Matthews, Brian
Dicketts, Rachel Beaumont, Aaron Miller, Jack and Gwynn Tucker and your
correspondent.

Do walk up and have a look. Go up the High Street, and straight ahead
all the way: up Bove Town, up Wick Hollow, straight over Maidencroft
Lane and over the stile into Paradise Lane. Walk about 200 yards along
Paradise Lane — and there behold the view. Pick a sunny day, and you can
see Wells cathedral and the Mendips, and near to you our great row of
trees. You may also be lucky enough to see, from above, a soaring
buzzard.

The whole experience will happy you mightily.

{% include new-article %}

{% include article-header with
	title: "Trees walk",
	author: "John Brunsdon",
	level: 2,
%}

Several members met on July 22 to visit, by car and by foot, several of
our tree sites. First call was the now established planting by the
carnival sheds at Common Moor. Then to the more recently planted Jubilee
Wood at Wick. Rain interfered, so we retired to Ian and Carol Tucker’s
kitchen for tea — with thanks.
