<figure>
<img src="../morland-Red17.jpg" alt="Roofs of industrial buildings as viewed from a high vantage point. A mixture of dirty glass and corrugated iron, along with various vents. Around the building are patchy grass, concrete, and shrubs. Some other industrial buildings are visible in the background, and a road runs along the left.">
<figcaption>

A view over the jagged roofs of Glastonbury’s very own satanic mills.

</figcaption>
</figure>

After nearly two decades of decay in the hands of private “developers”,
the derelict Morland-Baily site at the entrance to Glastonbury has at
last been taken into public ownership.

The South West Regional Development Agency bought the 31-acre shame this
spring from GR Holdings, based in London. It is the largest derelict
industrial site in Somerset. The RDA would not reveal the cost, calling
it commercially sensitive, but it was “at open market prices ... a
substantial amount,” many million. Mendip council has owned a further 14
acres, on the town side of the site, for the past six years.

First priority for the RDA is health and safety and making the site
secure, said Chris Foley, based in Bristol with the job title of
principal regeneration manager. This phase will continue into summer.

Meanwhile the sheepskin shop facing the Street Road, still trading under
the Morland name, along with its small factory downstairs, will continue
as before, except that the RDA is its new landlord.

Next will come a lengthy stage of fresh consultations, including formal
public meetings, with a wide variety of councils, businesses and
community groups. A presentation has already been made to the
Glastonbury Forum this month. The RDA will appoint consultants to carry
this stage forward.

All proposals for the eventual use of the site are up for a total
rethink. “We’re always interested in hearing what people think about
it,” said Mr Foley. “I want to understand what all the different
interest groups think so we can get it tabulated to see where there is
agreement and disagreement.”

The bulk of the finance needed to develop the site — £30 million? — will
need to come from the private sector, so any use will have to be
commercially viable.

When the project gets to the demolition stage, probably within a year,
“we would look to recycle materials where it is feasible.”

A tour of the site may be possible for Conservation Society members in
summer, after the RDA has dealt with health and safety. See details in
the next newsletter.

The SW RDA was set up in 1999, with an appointed board of businesspeople
and a wide cross-section of the community. The region stretches from
Gloucestershire to Swindon and Poole and west to Cornwall and the
Scillies. Registered office is in Exeter. It so far has £422 million of
European Structural Funds to administer by 2006.  To say the RDA reports
to the South West Regional Assembly is a bit too clear, because the role
of the assembly is still taking shape. One school of political thought
would have the seven English regions become equal to Wales and Scotland
as members of the European Union.

The RDA also administers the Single Regeneration Budget (SRB). Last
August, Glastonbury was awarded £713,000 from this government fund out
of a total £4.2m for the South West for projects dealing with social
exclusion and bringing jobs to the area.

<figure>
<img src="../morland-panes1.jpg" alt="An abandoned factory with a jagged roof. Almost all of the many hundred window panes are broken. The ground floor is graffitied. In the foreground is a concrete or dirt forecourt, and some overgrown bushes and plants are also visible.">
<figcaption>

The “Bauhaus” building, seen from Beckery Road: exactly 7 panes remain.
Photo by Jim Nagel

</figcaption>
</figure>

Brief history
-------------

Clark Son and Morland, the tannery and sheepskin business, failed in
1982. A Baily & Co, a similar business at the northern end of the site,
was owned by a London company, which bought the Morland assets as GR
Holdings. Ian Moore, a property developer, assembled parcels of land and
brought us Safeway, B&Q and the Wirral Park industrial estate; he still
owns a small tract of land near the Morland-Baily site but not part of
it. Welbeck Land, a development company in London, has never owned
freehold in the site but was appointed by GR to help with planning
applications; Welbeck is no longer on the scene.

Why wasn’t the site compulsorily purchased 18 years ago? I asked Malcolm
Williams, the Mendip development officer whose files have bulged with
the case for much of that time. “We obviously thought long and hard
about this. But to be fair, the owners have been very cooperative over
the past five years.”

Couldn’t the owners at least have got on with taking down buildings and
reclaiming materials instead of suddenly being in a rush with
bulldozers? Mr Williams explained that demolition would have limited the
owners’ options: they could always bring an existing building back to
its original use without new planning permission.

“But the RDA move is definitely a milestone,” he said, “and we’re all
glad about it.”

<del>

Contact: SW Regional Development Agency, 100 Temple St, Bristol, BS1
6AE; phone (0117) 933 0200; email *chris.foley@southwestrda.org.uk*

</del>
