Patrick Brown’s career as an architect and in the survey and assessment
of buildings for the listing authorities made his February 8 lecture
particularly informative. This is a core subject for any conservation
society.

Buildings or, more accurately, structures are added to the statutory
list if found to be of special architectural or historic interest. They
usually are not complete in their original form.

At first they were classified as Grades 1, 2, or 3, but this system has
been replaced by classifications of I, II\*, or II. Grade I represents a
structure of national significance, such as Wells Cathedral; II\*
classifies structures just below the first rank.

Listed buildings may be seen as in temporary care, for the future.
Almost all pre-1700 buildings are listed, most of those from 1700 to
1840, and post-1840 buildings selectively.

The process of listing began after the Second World War: as a result of
war damage and demolition of many buildings it was decided that an
inventory should be compiled. Initial surveys were superficial and
missed much. Eventually in 1982 the environment department began an
accelerated re-survey of listed buildings in every parish; English
Heritage took over in 1984 and continues.

The process of listing is slow: various checks follow initial
inspection, and eventually “greenbacks” are published with details of
resultant listings.

From his collection of 30,000 slides and anecdotes from his surveying
days, Patrick illustrated interesting buildings and features in them, in
a very wide range of materials, and explained the difficulties in
deciding on listing criteria or grades. The variety of listed structures
is enormous — from mediaeval woodwork to rusting aircraft hangars and
part Mulberry Harbour.

The audience will look at the built environment with a more critical and
educated eye.
