Vince Russet demonstrated with enthusiasm how archaeology is a
critically important way of looking at the world, with a selection of
slides of two areas of north Somerset.

At Stanton Drew a recent English Heritage geophysical survey has given a
tantalizing indication of how much more than the remaining stones, the
last surviving structure, is present on this site. The circles are
within an area of timber-post structures, perhaps including a causewayed
camp, the whole representing one of the largest complexes of its type in
the UK and one of the least studied. The surrounding landscape was also
shown to be of crucial importance in the examining the site.

Mr Russet, speaking in St John’s Centre on November 16, also presented a
review of his research along the north Somerset coast — an area of many
changes but with much of archaeological importance preserved by the
omnipresent mud.

This section of coastline revolved around the development of Bristol
since the tenth century, with a series of small ports based on the tidal
streams or pills along the coast from Portishead to Weston-super-Mare.
There are many indications of much earlier activity, with a pattern of
iron-age hill forts protecting the pills, and evidence of Roman
occupation at various sites.

It was fascinating to see how changes in mud levels allows the
examination of mediaeval fishing practices, timber wrecks and even the
recovery of experimental live explosive shells from the Palmerstonian
coastal defences of the last century. The study of exposed peat outcrops
has important environmental and climatic research potential.
