Some lament what they consider the urbanization of Glastonbury, but
development occurred during every period of history, and was no doubt
similarly lamented. Today the town has become “developed out”: few sites
are left that are suitable for new building, by virtue of being of high
landscape value or too near the floodplain.

Concern has been expressed about the new estate of 240 or more dwellings
under construction to the east of the town near the hospital and the
huge land-reclamation exercise involved. Such work has a long history.
The Lake Village site was built up about 100BC with clay transported
from island Glastonbury. The Wells road and causeway to Polsham was
built on stone taken from the ruined Abbey. More stone was laid for the
railway in the 19th century, and tons more in 1994 to build the western
relief road we have now.

We are starting a new exercise in identifying possible building land
through the Local Development Framework, so be ready to comment on
future proposals.

Climate change
--------------

Climate change has always taken place. Over millions of years this
country has been covered in ice, ocean, equatorial forest or desert.
Species have prospered for millions of years, like the dinosaurs, only
to be eliminated by forces outside their control. If we value the
climate we now enjoy, we should certainly mend our ways and live less
destructively so as not to accelerate change.

We are, however, not in total command of the situation. One
Krakatoa-like eruption could produce more toxic gases than all the
world’s coal-fired power stations. We will have to learn to live with
change and adapt our lifestyles. Somerset was so named because it was
the land of the Summer People, who moved to higher ground each winter.
Glastonbury was surrounded by tidal marsh until the surrounding land was
drained by the monks. In the 19th century cottages in Sharpham regularly
flooded in the winter, and their inhabitants used boats to visit
Glastonbury market. Old picture-postcards show the railway yard under
water and a large lake between the Mead at Street and Wearyall Hill. In
the 1950s and 60s the Godney road often became impassable, and Godney
could be reached only via Polsham.

Beware of alternative energy provision which could be environmentally
damaging. A Severn barrage could be disastrous, and a lot of people
dislike wind-turbine farms that can be seen for miles, upset birds and
don’t work on a calm day. We are not supposed to burn peat any longer —
but we could. Likewise there must be many tons of extractible coal left
in Somerset coalfields — but then that is wrong too. I fancy we shall
still need Hinkley Point! And the sun.
