Dressed in appropriate safari kit, five of us met by the Shakinashram in
Dod Lane (the former stables of Chalice Hill House) on June 16 and
headed up Bushy Coombe towards the Bulwarks Lane orchard. We were
looking for the noble beetle, or his grub, or evidence of the presence
of either.

<figure>
<img src="../noblechafer.jpg" alt="A shiny green beetle.">
<figcaption>

The now-rare beetle, about 2cm long, likes to live in old orchards.

</figcaption>
</figure>

This beautiful bright iridescent-green beetle, between a cock chafer and
a scarab, about the size of the first joint of your finger, is assumed
to be a measure of biodiversity. An expert told me that they don’t live
in Somerset any more. If they do, they should be found in rotting old
apple trees. Hence our foray.

We found evidence of their grubs’ tunnelling in both the orchards we
visited, but no beetle or grub *yet*. He should be about from June to
August, so we will look again.

“The Noble Chafer beetle is generally found in old orchard areas during
July and August,” explains Jill Nelson, of People’s Trust for Endangered
Species (PTES). “Unfortunately, these types of environment are regularly
being destroyed to grow more productive crops. The beetle has been
losing its habitat and its numbers have been dwindling for over a
century.”

Monitoring exactly where the beetle is found helps to focus conservation
efforts appropriately. Most recent records have come from
Gloucestershire, Herefordshire and Worcestershire, but historically it
lived in Cumbria, Kent, Devon, Essex, Hampshire and Oxfordshire. So if
you think you have seen one, let PTES know — even better, send a digital
photo to <enquiries@ptes.org>. And for a colourful postcard to aid
identification, send a stamped addressed envelope to PTES, 15 Cloisters
House, 8 Battersea Park Road, London, SW8 4BG).

The noble chafer (*Gnorimus nobilis*) is a beautiful, somewhat globular,
greenish, iridescent rare beetle about 2cm long. It is often confused
with the rose chafer (*Cefonia aurafa*), but has wrinkled wing cases,
unlike the smooth ones of the rose chafer. The noble chafer also has
pale flecks on both its wing cases and thorax and a distinct indentation
between the thorax and wing cases.

Noble chafers feed on nectar from open-structured flowers such as
hogweed, on sunny days in July and August. Their grubs (white, C-shaped,
up to 3cm long) live in rotten wood in the central hollows of decaying
fruit trees in traditional orchards, where they take two years to
develop into adult beetles. Most telling would be the presence of faecal
pellets (called frass), which collect like fine gravel, and can last for
several years if sheltered from rain.

The weather was warm, and the sounds of the Pilgrimage singing wafted up
from the Abbey grounds, so our very unscientific fieldwork in a quiet
old orchard on a Somerset hillside was fulfilling if not productive.
“Beetle II” takes place on Saturday August 11.

{% include new-article %}

{% include article-header with
  title: "Chalice Well tour",
  author: "Alan Fear",
%}

15 members took up the kind invitation from Chalice Well of a guided
walk around the gardens on May 17, led by the chief gardener, Ark
Redwood, and aided by Anthony Ward and Michelle Macauly-Haines.

We spent two hours being shown the layout of the gardens, ponds and, of
course, the well itself. Ark’s enthusiasm was infectious. To end the
enjoyable evening, we strolled through one of the Chalice Well orchards,
which our society helped to plant.

Thanks to our hosts and hostess for a very pleasant evening.
