<figure>
<img src="../northover-mill.jpg" alt="A stone house with a tiled roof and a very tall chimney straddles a narrow stream. The land in the foreground in unkempt, an the building looks to be in a somewhat poor state of repair.">
<figcaption>

The old Abbot’s mill at Northover. The Millstream flows beneath it,
toward the camera in this view.

</figcaption>
</figure>

Northover Mill, listed as Grade II and sitting next to the former
Morlands site, is on the market to local community and not-for-profit
organizations. The two-storey stone mill, built in 1517, was once part
of the Morlands tannery and was used for cloth-making. It was rebuilt in
the 18th century and has since been residential and office space but has
been derelict for 20 years.

Paul Calvert, property manager at the South West Regional Development
Agency, which owns the site, said: “It is really important that we bring
this building back to life, and we believe that local organisations are
perfectly placed to do so because they know exactly what the community
needs.

“We are open to suggestions. All reasonable ideas involving
community-based activities will be considered. We will make our decision
on who to sell this building to based on the most appropriate use — not
necessarily the amount of money offered.”

Interested parties should discuss their proposals with the local
planning authority, Mendip District Council, before submitting them.
Offers should include full details of the proposed use and initial
designs, which must demonstrate a high environmental standard, and a
business plan to demonstrate that the applicant’s proposals are
financially viable.

The closing date for tenders is August 30. To arrange a viewing or find
out more about the property, call King Sturge at [01225 32
4105](tel:+1441225324105).
