<figure>
<img src="/img/crownben.jpg" alt="A 3-storey building painted a cream colour, with a banner showing the word “Backpackers”. Hanging from four places on the building are flower baskets. To the left, slightly more towards the foreground, is the Market Cross monument. To the right, in the foreground, a man with short hair wearing a light blue short-sleeved shirt, blue jeans, and brown shoes stands facing the camera. He is holding up some papers in his right hand. Above him, closer to the camera, are some flowers.">
<figcaption>

The Crown stands! In 1997 it became the
[Backpackers](/newsletter/articles/100/crown/) hostel. Its new owner,
Ben Butterell, is waving his Conservation Society membership form.
Photo by Jim Nagel.

</figcaption>
</figure>

1971
----

The society was founded on May 18 when interested parties hastily
assembled so that a Glastonbury Conservation Society could be officially
formed. Immediately a letter of objection was sent to County Hall,
within the prescribed time limit, protesting against the proposed
demolition of the Crown Hotel and the erection of a retail shop on the
site.

1971–73
-------

Arising from the proposed demolition of the Crown Hotel, it was realized
that many other buildings in Glastonbury were also at risk. So members
of the newly formed society spot-listed buildings they considered
important. The Department of the Environment was concerned by the number
of spot-listings. Consequently, an inspector spent ten weeks in the town
compiling a new statutory list. This initiative brought the society into
disrepute with the Glastonbury Borough Council of the day. The council
had already resisted attempts by the county council to designate a
Conservation Area in Glastonbury.

1973–75
-------

The society started work on footpath clearance and tree-planting. During
this time a better relationship was built with the newly formed Town
council (in 1973 the old Glastonbury Borough Council was abolished in
the government's reorganization of local authorities; most of its powers
went to the new Mendip District Council). The society actually took over
the Town council’s responsibilities for tree-planting and footpath
maintenance. For the footpath work, the society receives the Town
council’s allocation of monies for footpath maintenance under the
“Parish Scheme”. In 1988 the allocation was £50.

1975
----

In November, newsletter number 1 was published.

<figure>
<img src="/img/cons-area-map.jpg" alt="Map of the Glastonbury Conservation Area showing a large area including the town centre, abbey ruins, and tor, shaded in green.">
<figcaption>

The Conservation area — shaded green on this map — was finally
established in 1976. It was extended in 1991 to include the Tor and
Bushy Coombe.

</figcaption>
</figure>

1976
----

The centre of Glastonbury was designated a Conservation Area by Mendip
District Council, the successor to the borough council, after much
lobbying of the chief planning officer by the society. Mendip had been
instructed by County to try to establish the Conservation Area. The
district council, however, had few funds available for the project. So,
when the area (a smaller area than originally proposed by County) was
designated, there were no resources for the publication of an
introductory explanatory document of aims and objectives.

Some of the town’s present problems
<span class="ednote">[this was written in 1988 — Ed.]</span>
can be attributed to this lack of documentation
because developers and planners have no set of guidelines to which they
can refer. Over the years the society has tried to compensate for this
lack of documentation by publishing, in the quarterly newsletter,
guidelines produced for other Conservation Areas.

1976
----

*Glastonbury Footpath Walks* by John Brunsdon on sale.

1976–77
-------

Annual footpath clearance and tree-planting schemes. John Brunsdon
became chairman.

1978
----

*Glastonbury Town Trail* by Neill Bonham (chairman 1972–77) was
published.

1978–80
-------

Annual footpath clearance and tree-planting schemes.

1980
----

Mendip District Council’s conservation officer achieved Outstanding
Conservation Area status for the centre of Glastonbury.

1981
----

*Glastonbury Town Trail* revised by Neill Bonham.

1981–84
-------

Annual footpath clearance and tree-planting schemes.

<figure>
<img src="../canopybird.jpg" alt="A railway canopy stands out-of-place in a car park. The canopy is painted in a cream colour. The lower halves of the pillars holding it up are green. Cars are parked beneath it, with more in the foreground outside of its shelter. Some trees are visible, and behind the canopy is a long stone wall. The sky is blue and almost clear. In the left, in the background, some red-brick houses can be seen. A flock of birds flies across the foreground of the photo.">
<figcaption>

Martin Godfrey’s idea to move the canopy from the disused railway
station to the main carpark in the centre of town won a 1984 award for
the Conservation Society. It now provides shelter for the weekly market
stalls, not to mention visual relief from the acres of asphalt desert.
Photo by Jim Nagel, 2001.

</figcaption>
</figure>

<a name="canopy"></a>

1984
----

Pride of Place Competition: second prize awarded to the society by the
Civic Trust, David Knightly Charitable Trust, for the society’s
proposals for the restoration and re-siting of the canopy from the old
railway station to St John’s carpark. The project was originally the
idea of Martin Godfrey (committee member 1975–79).

1985
----

For the first national Environment Week, the society mounted an
exhibition of its work in an empty local shop.

1985–86
-------

Annual footpath clearance and tree-planting schemes.

1986
----

*This is Glastonbury*, a collection of photographs by Kevin Redpath
(committee member 1984–87) with comments by Neill Bonham. An exhibition
associated with this publication was mounted in the Somerset Rural Life
Musetum for a month prior to Environment Week.

1987
----

European Year of the Environment. The society alerted all organizations
in Glastonbury to the significance of this year and then acted as
coordinator of their projects. The society’s projects:

-   a series of monthly meetings, instead of quarterly ones. Speakers
    included representatives from county and district councils, Wessex
    Water Authority, Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, Somerset
    Trust for Nature Conservation and Glastonbury Abbey trustees.
-   A major tree-planting scheme on the country side of a new housing
    development\
-   The initiation of a major stile-replacement project for the footpath
    network. A grant for The project came from the Countryside
    Commission, and the Manpower Services Commission undertook the work.
    The society’s committee members did the administrative work.

1988
----

European Year of the Environment in Somerset 1987–88. Environmental
Project Competition. Second Prize in the Environmental Organizations
category was awarded to the society for its project of replacing 50
stiles in the Glastonbury footpath network. Newsletter 49 was published
in October.

On October 15, the Mayor of Glastonbury organized an Environment
Exhibition in the Town Hall. The society’s stand incorporated a
full-scale stile and kissing-gate. Behind these, photographs of the work
of the society were displayed, together with press cuttings and
publications.

Summerhouse Orchard Housing Association: During the 1970s the society
formed this association with a view to the practicality of restoring
derelict cottages. The association, however, functioned separately from
the society. The Summerhouse Orchard terrace was owned by the Methodist
Church and had had a closing order served on it. The association
purchased the terrace with an interest-free loan from Stephen Morland,
the society’s president since 1975. The renovation of the terrace was
successfully accomplished.

The cottages were sold individually and have proved very popular as
small-unit housing. The association was disbanded because it was unable
to compete with modern-day developers.
