<aside class="ednote">

Following her item in Newsletter 89 about Block O at the Morlands site —
its architect Jack Hepworth is a member of this Society — Stephanie
Morland has sent this letter with photos to the editor of *Building
Design*.

</aside>

<div class="multipic">
<figure>
<img src="../sainsbury-Greenwich.jpg" alt="A warehouse interior during construction. A construction worker stands on a raised platform. Some construction materials lie on the floor, which is otherwise empty.">
<figcaption>
Sainsbury’s at Greenwich (2000, praised in design magazine)
</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="../morland-blockO.jpg" alt="An empty factory interior.">
<figcaption>
Morlands Block O at Glastonbury (1961, architect Jack Hepworth)
</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

40 years on, Sainsbury’s splendid new millennium store at Greenwich,
featured in *Building Design* last week, is catching up with
Glastonbury!

The design of the main store area at Greenwich is remarkably similar to
that of the Hepworth building on the derelict Morlands site here,
completed in 1961: the same curved roof spans over a clear 120-foot
space (ignoring the old service grid of pipes) and the similar impact of
the sequence of rooflights.

It could be adapted to make an equally eye-catching low-energy-use
millennium building.

But of course the developer, Welbeck Land, wants to demolish it to make
way for … guess what … a modern superstore!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The latest issue of *Free State* magazine (£1.95 from Unique
Publications or bookshops) has an update on the campaign to adapt some
of the worthwhile buildings on the Morlands site for new uses, rather
than wait forever for wholesale high-capital “development” that will
further undermine the town centre. We are hoping that a tour of the site
can be arranged for Conservation Society members.
